THE EDGE OF THE KNIFE
By H. BEAM PIPER
  *  *  *  *  *
This story was rejected by two top-flight science-fiction editors for
the same reason: "Too hot to handle." "Too dangerous for our book."
We'd like to know whether or not the readers of_ Amazing Stories
agree. Drop us a line after you've read it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Chalmers stopped talking abruptly, warned by the sudden attentiveness
of the class in front of him. They were all staring; even Guellick, in
the fourth row, was almost half awake. Then one of them, taking his
silence as an invitation to questions found his voice.
"You say Khalid ib'n Hussein's been assassinated?" he asked
incredulously. "When did that happen?"
[Illustration: There was no past--no future--only a great chaotic
NOW.]
"In 1973, at Basra." There was a touch of impatience in his voice;
surely they ought to know that much. "He was shot, while leaving the
Parliament Building, by an Egyptian Arab named Mohammed Noureed,
with an old U. S. Army M3 submachine-gun. Noureed killed two of
Khalid's guards and wounded another before he was overpowered. He was
lynched on the spot by the crowd; stoned to death. Ostensibly, he and
his accomplices were religious fanatics; however, there can be no
doubt whatever that the murder was inspired, at least indirectly, by
the Eastern Axis."
The class stirred like a grain-field in the wind. Some looked at him
in blank amazement; some were hastily averting faces red with poorly
suppressed laughter. For a moment he was puzzled, and then realization
hit him like a blow in the stomach-pit. He'd forgotten, again.
"I didn't see anything in the papers about it," one boy was saying.
"The newscast, last evening, said Khalid was in Ankara, talking to the
President of Turkey," another offered.
"Professor Chalmers, would you tell us just what effect Khalid's death
had upon the Islamic Caliphate and the Middle Eastern situation in
general?" a third voice asked with exaggerated solemnity. That was
Kendrick, the class humorist; the question was pure baiting.
"Well, Mr. Kendrick, I'm afraid it's a little too early to assess the
full results of a thing like that, if they can ever be fully assessed.
For instance, who, in 1911, could have predicted all the consequences
of the pistol-shot at Sarajevo? Who, even today, can guess what the
history of the world would have been had Zangarra not missed Franklin
Roosevelt in 1932? There's always that if."
He went on talking safe generalities as he glanced covertly at his
watch. Only five minutes to the end of the period; thank heaven he
hadn't made that slip at the beginning of the class. "For instance,
tomorrow, when we take up the events in India from the First World War
to the end of British rule, we will be largely concerned with another
victim of the assassin's bullet, Mohandas K. Gandhi. You may ask
yourselves, then, by how much that bullet altered the history of the
Indian sub-continent. A word of warning, however: The events we will
be discussing will be either contemporary with or prior to what was
discussed today. I hope that you're all keeping your notes properly
dated. It's always easy to become confused in matters of chronology."
He wished, too late, that he hadn't said that. It pointed up the very
thing he was trying to play down, and raised a general laugh.
As soon as the room was empty, he hastened to his desk, snatched
pencil and notepad. This had been a bad one, the worst yet; he hadn't
heard the end of it by any means. He couldn't waste thought on that
now, though. This was all new and important; it had welled up suddenly
and without warning into his conscious mind, and he must get it down
in notes before the "memory"--even mentally, he always put that word
into quotes--was lost. He was still scribbling furiously when the
instructor who would use the room for the next period entered,
followed by a few of his students. Chalmers finished, crammed the
notes into his pocket, and went out into the hall.
Most of his own Modern History IV class had left the building and were
on their way across the campus for science classes. A few, however,
were joining groups for other classes here in Prescott Hall, and in
every group, they were the center of interest. Sometimes, when they
saw him, they would fall silent until he had passed; sometimes they
didn't, and he caught snatches of conversation.
"Oh, brother! Did Chalmers really blow his jets this time!" one voice
was saying.
"Bet he won't be around next year."
Another quartet, with their heads together, were talking more
seriously.
"Well, I'm not majoring in History, myself, but I think it's an
outrage that some people's diplomas are going to depend on grades
given by a lunatic!"
"Mine will, and I'm not going to stand for it. My old man's president
of the Alumni Association, and...."
  *  *  *  *  *
That was something he had not thought of, before. It gave him an ugly
start. He was still thinking about it as he turned into the side hall
to the History Department offices and entered the cubicle he shared
with a colleague. The colleague, old Pottgeiter, Medieval History, was
emerging in a rush; short, rotund, gray-bearded, his arms full of
books and papers, oblivious, as usual, to anything that had happened
since the Battle of Bosworth or the Fall of Constantinople. Chalmers
stepped quickly out of his way and entered behind him. Marjorie
Fenner, the secretary they also shared, was tidying up the old man's
desk.
"Good morning, Doctor Chalmers." She looked at him keenly for a
moment. "They give you a bad time again in Modern Four?"
Good Lord, did he show it that plainly? In any case, it was no use
trying to kid Marjorie. She'd hear the whole story before the end of
the day.
"Gave myself a bad time."
Marjorie, still fussing with Pottgeiter's desk, was about to say
something in reply. Instead, she exclaimed in exasperation.
"Ohhh! That man! He's forgotten his notes again!" She gathered some
papers from Pottgeiter's desk, rushing across the room and out the
door with them.
For a while, he sat motionless, the books and notes for General
European History II untouched in front of him. This was going to raise
hell. It hadn't been the first slip he'd made, either; that thought
kept recurring to him. There had been the time when he had alluded to
the colonies on Mars and Venus. There had been the time he'd mentioned
the secession of Canada from the British Commonwealth, and the time
he'd called the U. N. the Terran Federation. And the time he'd tried
to get a copy of Franchard's _Rise and Decline of the System States_,
which wouldn't be published until the Twenty-eighth Century, out of
the college library. None of those had drawn much comment, beyond a
few student jokes about the history professor who lived in the future
instead of the past. Now, however, they'd all be remembered, raked up,
exaggerated, and added to what had happened this morning.
He sighed and sat down at Marjorie's typewriter and began transcribing
his notes. Assassination of Khalid ib'n Hussein, the pro-Western
leader of the newly formed Islamic Caliphate; period of anarchy in the
Middle East; interfactional power-struggles; Turkish intervention. He
wondered how long that would last; Khalid's son, Tallal ib'n Khalid,
was at school in England when his father was--would be--killed. He
would return, and eventually take his father's place, in time to bring
the Caliphate into the Terran Federation when the general war came.
There were some notes on that already; the war would result from an
attempt by the Indian Communists to seize East Pakistan. The trouble
was that he so seldom "remembered" an exact date. His "memory" of the
year of Khalid's assassination was an exception.
Nineteen seventy-three--why, that was this year. He looked at the
calendar. October 16, 1973. At very most, the Arab statesman had two
and a half months to live. Would there be any possible way in which he
could give a credible warning? He doubted it. Even if there were, he
questioned whether he should--for that matter, whether he
_could_--interfere....
  *  *  *  *  *
He always lunched at the Faculty Club; today was no time to call
attention to himself by breaking an established routine. As he
entered, trying to avoid either a furtive slink or a chip-on-shoulder
swagger, the crowd in the lobby stopped talking abruptly, then began
again on an obviously changed subject. The word had gotten around,
apparently. Handley, the head of the Latin Department, greeted him
with a distantly polite nod. Pompous old owl; regarded himself, for
some reason, as a sort of unofficial Dean of the Faculty. Probably
didn't want to be seen fraternizing with controversial characters.
One of the younger men, with a thin face and a mop of unruly hair,
advanced to meet him as he came in, as cordial as Handley was remote.
"Oh, hello, Ed!" he greeted, clapping a hand on Chalmers' shoulder. "I
was hoping I'd run into you. Can you have dinner with us this
evening?" He was sincere.
"Well, thanks, Leonard. I'd like to, but I have a lot of work. Could
you give me a rain-check?"
"Oh, surely. My wife was wishing you'd come around, but I know how it
is. Some other evening?"
"Yes, indeed." He guided Fitch toward the dining-room door and nodded
toward a table. "This doesn't look too crowded; let's sit here."
After lunch, he stopped in at his office. Marjorie Fenner was there,
taking dictation from Pottgeiter; she nodded to him as he entered, but
she had no summons to the president's office.
  *  *  *  *  *
The summons was waiting for him, the next morning, when he entered the
office after Modern History IV, a few minutes past ten.
"Doctor Whitburn just phoned," Marjorie said. "He'd like to see you,
as soon as you have a vacant period."
"Which means right away. I shan't keep him waiting."
She started to say something, swallowed it, and then asked if he
needed anything typed up for General European II.
"No, I have everything ready." He pocketed the pipe he had filled on
entering, and went out.
  *  *  *  *  *
The president of Blanley College sat hunched forward at his desk; he
had rounded shoulders and round, pudgy fists and a round, bald head.
He seemed to be expecting his visitor to stand at attention in front
of him. Chalmers got the pipe out of his pocket, sat down in the
desk-side chair, and snapped his lighter.
"Good morning, Doctor Whitburn," he said very pleasantly.
Whitburn's scowl deepened. "I hope I don't have to tell you why I
wanted to see you," he began.
"I have an idea." Chalmers puffed until the pipe was drawing
satisfactorily. "It might help you get started if you did, though."
"I don't suppose, at that, that you realize the full effect of your
performance, yesterday morning, in Modern History Four," Whitburn
replied. "I don't suppose you know, for instance, that I had to
intervene at the last moment and suppress an editorial in the _Black
and Green_, derisively critical of you and your teaching methods, and,
by implication, of the administration of this college. You didn't hear
about that, did you? No, living as you do in the future, you
wouldn't."
"If the students who edit the _Black and Green_ are dissatisfied with
anything here, I'd imagine they ought to say so," Chalmers commented.
"Isn't that what they teach in the journalism classes, that the
purpose of journalism is to speak for the dissatisfied? Why make
exception?"
"I should think you'd be grateful to me for trying to keep your
behavior from being made a subject of public ridicule among your
students. Why, this editorial which I suppressed actually went so far
as to question your sanity!"
"I should suppose it might have sounded a good deal like that, to
them. Of course, I have been preoccupied, lately, with an imaginative
projection of present trends into the future. I'll quite freely admit
that I should have kept my extracurricular work separate from my
class and lecture work, but...."
"That's no excuse, even if I were sure it were true! What you did,
while engaged in the serious teaching of history, was to indulge in a
farrago of nonsense, obvious as such to any child, and damage not only
your own standing with your class but the standing of Blanley College
as well. Doctor Chalmers, if this were the first incident of the kind
it would be bad enough, but it isn't. You've done things like this
before, and I've warned you before. I assumed, then, that you were
merely showing the effects of overwork, and I offered you a vacation,
which you refused to take. Well, this is the limit. I'm compelled to
request your immediate resignation."
Chalmers laughed. "A moment ago, you accused me of living in the
future. It seems you're living in the past. Evidently you haven't
heard about the Higher Education Faculty Tenure Act of 1963, or such
things as tenure-contracts. Well, for your information, I have one;
you signed it yourself, in case you've forgotten. If you want my
resignation, you'll have to show cause, in a court of law, why my
contract should be voided, and I don't think a slip of the tongue is
a reason for voiding a contract that any court would accept."
Whitburn's face reddened. "You don't, don't you? Well, maybe it isn't,
but insanity is. It's a very good reason for voiding a contract
voidable on grounds of unfitness or incapacity to teach."
He had been expecting, and mentally shrinking from, just that. Now
that it was out, however, he felt relieved. He gave another short
laugh.
"You're willing to go into open court, covered by reporters from
papers you can't control as you do this student sheet here, and
testify that for the past twelve years you've had an insane professor
on your faculty?"
"You're.... You're trying to blackmail me?" Whitburn demanded, half
rising.
"It isn't blackmail to tell a man that a bomb he's going to throw will
blow up in his hand." Chalmers glanced quickly at his watch. "Now,
Doctor Whitburn, if you have nothing further to discuss, I have a
class in a few minutes. If you'll excuse me...."
He rose. For a moment, he stood facing Whitburn; when the college
president said nothing, he inclined his head politely and turned,
going out.
Whitburn's secretary gave the impression of having seated herself
hastily at her desk the second before he opened the door. She watched
him, round-eyed, as he went out into the hall.
He reached his own office ten minutes before time for the next class.
Marjorie was typing something for Pottgeiter; he merely nodded to her,
and picked up the phone. The call would have to go through the school
exchange, and he had a suspicion that Whitburn kept a check on outside
calls. That might not hurt any, he thought, dialing a number.
"Attorney Weill's office," the girl who answered said.
"Edward Chalmers. Is Mr. Weill in?"
She'd find out. He was; he answered in a few seconds.
"Hello, Stanly; Ed Chalmers. I think I'm going to need a little help.
I'm having some trouble with President Whitburn, here at the college.
A matter involving the validity of my tenure-contract. I don't want to
go into it over this line. Have you anything on for lunch?"
"No, I haven't. When and where?" the lawyer asked.
He thought for a moment. Nowhere too close the campus, but not too far
away.
"How about the Continental; Fontainbleu Room? Say twelve-fifteen."
"That'll be all right. Be seeing you."
Marjorie looked at him curiously as he gathered up the things he
needed for the next class.
  *  *  *  *  *
Stanly Weill had a thin dark-eyed face. He was frowning as he set down
his coffee-cup.
"Ed, you ought to know better than to try to kid your lawyer," he
said. "You say Whitburn's trying to force you to resign. With your
contract, he can't do that, not without good and sufficient cause, and
under the Faculty Tenure Law, that means something just an inch short
of murder in the first degree. Now, what's Whitburn got on you?"
Beat around the bush and try to build a background, or come out with
it at once and fill in the details afterward? He debated mentally for
a moment, then decided upon the latter course.
"Well, it happens that I have the ability to prehend future events. I
can, by concentrating, bring into my mind the history of the world, at
least in general outline, for the next five thousand years. Whitburn
thinks I'm crazy, mainly because I get confused at times and forget
that something I know about hasn't happened yet."
Weill snatched the cigarette from his mouth to keep from swallowing
it. As it was, he choked on a mouthful of smoke and coughed violently,
then sat back in the booth-seat, staring speechlessly.
"It started a little over three years ago," Chalmers continued. "Just
after New Year's, 1970. I was getting up a series of seminars for some
of my postgraduate students on extrapolation of present social and
political trends to the middle of the next century, and I began to
find that I was getting some very fixed and definite ideas of what the
world of 2050 to 2070 would be like. Completely unified world,
abolition of all national states under a single world sovereignty,
colonies on Mars and Venus, that sort of thing. Some of these ideas
didn't seem quite logical; a number of them were complete reversals of
present trends, and a lot seemed to depend on arbitrary and
unpredictable factors. Mind, this was before the first rocket landed
on the Moon, when the whole moon-rocket and lunar-base project was a
triple-top secret. But I knew, in the spring of 1970, that the first
unmanned rocket would be called the _Kilroy_, and that it would be
launched some time in 1971. You remember, when the news was released,
it was stated that the rocket hadn't been christened until the day
before it was launched, when somebody remembered that old
'Kilroy-was-here' thing from the Second World War. Well, I knew about
it over a year in advance."
Weill had been listening in silence. He had a naturally skeptical
face; his present expression mightn't really mean that he didn't
believe what he was hearing.
"How'd you get all this stuff? In dreams?"
Chalmers shook his head. "It just came to me. I'd be sitting reading,
or eating dinner, or talking to one of my classes, and the first thing
I'd know, something out of the future would come bubbling up in me. It
just kept pushing up into my conscious mind. I wouldn't have an idea
of something one minute, and the next it would just be part of my
general historical knowledge; I'd know it as positively as I know that
Columbus discovered America in. 1492. The only difference is that I
can usually remember where I've read something in past history, but my
future history I know without knowing how I know it."
"Ah, that's the question!" Weill pounced. "You don't know how you know
it. Look, Ed, we've both studied psychology, elementary psychology at
least. Anybody who has to work with people, these days, has to know
some psychology. What makes you sure that these prophetic impressions
of yours aren't manufactured in your own subconscious mind?"
"That's what I thought, at first. I thought my subconscious was just
building up this stuff to fill the gaps in what I'd produced from
logical extrapolation. I've always been a stickler for detail," he
added, parenthetically. "It would be natural for me to supply details
for the future. But, as I said, a lot of this stuff is based on
unpredictable and arbitrary factors that can't be inferred from
anything in the present. That left me with the alternatives of
delusion or precognition, and if I ever came near going crazy, it was
before the _Kilroy_ landed and the news was released. After that, I
knew which it was."
"And yet, you can't explain how you can have real knowledge of a
thing before it happens. Before it exists," Weill said.
"I really don't need to. I'm satisfied with knowing that I know. But
if you want me to furnish a theory, let's say that all these things
really do exist, in the past or in the future, and that the present is
just a moving knife-edge that separates the two. You can't even
indicate the present. By the time you make up your mind to say, 'Now!'
and transmit the impulse to your vocal organs, and utter the word, the
original present moment is part of the past. The knife-edge has gone
over it. Most people think they know only the present; what they know
is the past, which they have already experienced, or read about. The
difference with me is that I can see what's on both sides of the
knife-edge."
Weill put another cigarette in his mouth and bent his head to the
flame of his lighter. For a moment, he sat motionless, his thin face
rigid.
"What do you want me to do?" he asked. "I'm a lawyer, not a
psychiatrist."
"I want a lawyer. This is a legal matter. Whitburn's talking about
voiding my tenure contract. You helped draw it; I have a right to
expect you to help defend it."
"Ed, have you been talking about this to anybody else?" Weill asked.
"You're the first person I've mentioned it to. It's not the sort of
thing you'd bring up casually, in a conversation."
"Then how'd Whitburn get hold of it?"
"He didn't, not the way I've given it to you. But I made a couple of
slips, now and then. I made a bad one yesterday morning."
He told Weill about it, and about his session with the president of
the college that morning. The lawyer nodded.
"That was a bad one, but you handled Whitburn the right way," Weill
said. "What he's most afraid of is publicity, getting the college
mixed up in anything controversial, and above all, the reactions of
the trustees and people like that. If Dacre or anybody else makes any
trouble, he'll do his best to cover for you. Not willingly, of course,
but because he'll know that that's the only way he can cover for
himself. I don't think you'll have any more trouble with him. If you
can keep your own nose clean, that is. Can you do that?"
"I believe so. Yesterday I got careless. I'll not do that again."
"You'd better not." Weill hesitated for a moment. "I said I was a
lawyer, not a psychiatrist. I'm going to give you some psychiatrist's
advice, though. Forget this whole thing. You say you can bring these
impressions into your conscious mind by concentrating?" He waited
briefly; Chalmers nodded, and he continued: "Well, stop it. Stop
trying to harbor this stuff. It's dangerous, Ed. Stop playing around
with it."
"You think I'm crazy, too?"
Weill shook his head impatiently. "I didn't say that. But I'll say,
now, that you're losing your grip on reality. You are constructing a
system of fantasies, and the first thing you know, they will become
your reality, and the world around you will be unreal and illusory.
And that's a state of mental incompetence that I can recognize, as a
lawyer."
"How about the _Kilroy_?"
Weill looked at him intently. "Ed, are you sure you did have that
experience?" he asked. "I'm not trying to imply that you're
consciously lying to me about that. I am suggesting that you
manufactured a memory of that incident in your subconscious mind, and
are deluding yourself into thinking that you knew about it in advance.
False memory is a fairly common thing, in cases like this. Even the
little psychology I know, I've heard about that. There's been talk
about rockets to the Moon for years. You included something about that
in your future-history fantasy, and then, after the event, you
convinced yourself that you'd known all about it, including the
impromptu christening of the rocket, all along."
A hot retort rose to his lips; he swallowed it hastily. Instead, he
nodded amicably.
"That's a point worth thinking of. But right now, what I want to know
is, will you represent me in case Whitburn does take this to court and
does try to void my contract?"
"Oh, yes; as you said, I have an obligation to defend the contracts I
draw up. But you'll have to avoid giving him any further reason for
trying to void it. Don't make any more of these slips. Watch what you
say, in class or out of it. And above all, don't talk about this to
anybody. Don't tell anybody that you can foresee the future, or even
talk about future probabilities. Your business is with the past;
stick to it."
  *  *  *  *  *
The afternoon passed quietly enough. Word of his defiance of Whitburn
had gotten around among the faculty--Whitburn might have his secretary
scared witless in his office, but not gossipless outside it--though it
hadn't seemed to have leaked down to the students yet. Handley, the
Latin professor, managed to waylay him in a hallway, a hallway Handley
didn't normally use.
"The tenure-contract system under which we hold our positions here is
one of our most valuable safeguards," he said, after exchanging
greetings. "It was only won after a struggle, in a time of public
animosity toward all intellectuals, and even now, our professional
position would be most insecure without it."
"Yes. I found that out today, if I hadn't known it when I took part in
the struggle you speak of."
"It should not be jeopardized," Handley declared.
"You think I'm jeopardizing it?"
Handley frowned. He didn't like being pushed out of the safety of
generalization into specific cases.
"Well, now that you make that point, yes. I do. If Doctor Whitburn
tries to make an issue of ... of what happened yesterday ... and if
the court decides against you, you can see the position all of us will
be in."
"What do you think I should have done? Given him my resignation when
he demanded it? We have our tenure-contracts, and the system was
instituted to prevent just the sort of arbitrary action Whitburn tried
to take with me today. If he wants to go to court, he'll find that
out."
"And if he wins, he'll establish a precedent that will threaten the
security of every college and university faculty member in the state.
In any state where there's a tenure law."
Leonard Fitch, the psychologist, took an opposite attitude. As
Chalmers was leaving the college at the end of the afternoon, Fitch
cut across the campus to intercept him.
"I heard about the way you stood up to Whitburn this morning, Ed," he
said. "Glad you did it. I only wish I'd done something like that three
years ago.... Think he's going to give you any real trouble?"
"I doubt it."
"Well, I'm on your side if he does. I won't be the only one, either."
"Well, thank you, Leonard. It always helps to know that. I don't think
there'll be any more trouble, though."
  *  *  *  *  *
He dined alone at his apartment, and sat over his coffee, outlining
his work for the next day. When both were finished, he dallied
indecisively, Weill's words echoing through his mind and raising
doubts. It was possible that he had been manufacturing the whole thing
in his subconscious mind. That was, at least, a more plausible theory
than any he had constructed to explain an ability to produce real
knowledge of the future. Of course, there was that business about the
_Kilroy_. That had been too close on too many points to be dismissed
as coincidence. Then, again, Weill's words came back to disquiet him.
Had he really gotten that before the event, as he believed, or had he
only imagined, later, that he had?
There was one way to settle that. He rose quickly and went to the
filing-cabinet where he kept his future-history notes and began
pulling out envelopes. There was nothing about the _Kilroy_ in the
Twentieth Century file, where it should be, although he examined each
sheet of notes carefully. The possibility that his notes on that might
have been filed out of place by mistake occurred to him; he looked in
every other envelope. The notes, as far as they went, were all filed
in order, and each one bore, beside the future date of occurrence, the
date on which the knowledge--or must he call it delusion?--had come to
him. But there was no note on the landing of the first unmanned rocket
on Luna.
He put the notes away and went back to his desk, rummaging through the
drawers, and finding nothing. He searched everywhere in the apartment
where a sheet of paper could have been mislaid, taking all his
books, one by one, from the shelves and leafing through them, even
books he knew he had not touched for more than three years. In the
end, he sat down again at his desk, defeated. The note on the _Kilroy_
simply did not exist.
Of course, that didn't settle it, as finding the note would have. He
remembered--or believed he remembered--having gotten that item of
knowledge--or delusion--in 1970, shortly before the end of the school
term. It hadn't been until after the fall opening of school that he
had begun making notes. He could have had the knowledge of the robot
rocket in his mind then, and neglected putting it on paper.
He undressed, put on his pajamas, poured himself a drink, and went to
bed. Three hours later, still awake, he got up, and poured himself
another, bigger, drink. Somehow, eventually, he fell asleep.
  *  *  *  *  *
The next morning, he searched his desk and book-case in the office at
school. He had never kept a diary; now he was wishing that he had.
That might have contained something that would be evidence, one way or
the other. All day, he vacillated between conviction of the reality of
his future knowledge and resolution to have no more to do with it.
Once he decided to destroy all the notes he had made, and thought of
making a special study of some facet of history, and writing another
book, to occupy his mind.
After lunch, he found that more data on the period immediately before
the Thirty Days' War was coming into his consciousness. He resolutely
suppressed it, knowing as he did that it might never come to him
again. That evening, too, he cooked dinner for himself at his
apartment, and laid out his class-work for the next day. He'd better
not stay in, that evening; too much temptation to settle himself by
the living-room fire with his pipe and his notepad and indulge in the
vice he had determined to renounce. After a little debate, he decided
upon a movie; he put on again the suit he had taken off on coming
home, and went out.
  *  *  *  *  *
The picture, a random choice among the three shows in the
neighborhood, was about Seventeenth Century buccaneers; exciting
action and a sound-track loud with shots and cutlass-clashing. He let
himself be drawn into it completely, and, until it was finished, he
was able to forget both the college and the history of the future.
But, as he walked home, he was struck by the parallel between the
buccaneers of the West Indies and the space-pirates in the days of the
dissolution of the First Galactic Empire, in the Tenth Century of the
Interstellar Era. He hadn't been too clear on that period, and he
found new data rising in his mind; he hurried his steps, almost
running upstairs to his room. It was long after midnight before he had
finished the notes he had begun on his return home.
Well, that had been a mistake, but he wouldn't make it again. He
determined again to destroy his notes, and began casting about for a
subject which would occupy his mind to the exclusion of the future.
Not the Spanish Conquistadores; that was too much like the early
period of interstellar expansion. He thought for a time of the Sepoy
Mutiny, and then rejected it--he could "remember" something much like
that on one of the planets of the Beta Hydrae system, in the Fourth
Century of the Atomic Era. There were so few things, in the history of
the past, which did not have their counter-parts in the future. That
evening, too, he stayed at home, preparing for his various classes for
the rest of the week and making copious notes on what he would talk
about to each. He needed more whiskey to get to sleep that night.
Whitburn gave him no more trouble, and if any of the trustees or
influential alumni made any protest about what had happened in Modern
History IV, he heard nothing about it. He managed to conduct his
classes without further incidents, and spent his evenings trying, not
always successfully, to avoid drifting into "memories" of the
future....
  *  *  *  *  *
He came into his office that morning tired and unrefreshed by the few
hours' sleep he had gotten the night before, edgy from the strain, of
trying to adjust his mind to the world of Blanley College in mid-April
of 1973. Pottgeiter hadn't arrived yet, but Marjorie Fenner was
waiting for him; a newspaper in her hand, almost bursting with
excitement.
"Here; have you seen it, Doctor Chalmers?" she asked as he entered.
He shook his head. He ought to read the papers more, to keep track of
the advancing knife-edge that divided what he might talk about from
what he wasn't supposed to know, but each morning he seemed to have
less and less time to get ready for work.
"Well, look! Look at that!"
She thrust the paper into his hands, still folded, the big, black
headline where he could see it.
  KHALID IB'N HUSSEIN ASSASSINATED
He glanced over the leading paragraphs. Leader of Islamic Caliphate
shot to death in Basra ... leaving Parliament Building for his palace
outside the city ... fanatic, identified as an Egyptian named Mohammed
Noureed ... old American submachine-gun ... two guards killed and a
third seriously wounded ... seized by infuriated mob and stoned to
death on the spot....
For a moment, he felt guilt, until he realized that nothing he could
have done could have altered the event. The death of Khalid ib'n
Hussein, and all the millions of other deaths that would follow it,
were fixed in the matrix of the space-time continuum. Including,
maybe, the death of an obscure professor of Modern History named
Edward Chalmers.
"At least, this'll be the end of that silly flap about what happened a
month ago in Modern Four. This is modern history, now; I can talk
about it without a lot of fools yelling their heads off."
She was staring at him wide-eyed. No doubt horrified at his
cold-blooded attitude toward what was really a shocking and senseless
crime.
"Yes, of course; the man's dead. So's Julius Caesar, but we've gotten
over being shocked at his murder."
He would have to talk about it in Modern History IV, he supposed;
explain why Khalid's death was necessary to the policies of the
Eastern Axis, and what the consequences would be. How it would hasten
the complete dissolution of the old U. N., already weakened by the
crisis over the Eastern demands for the demilitarization and
internationalization of the United States Lunar Base, and necessitate
the formation of the Terran Federation, and how it would lead,
eventually, to the Thirty Days' War. No, he couldn't talk about that;
that was on the wrong side of the knife-edge. Have to be careful about
the knife-edge; too easy to cut himself on it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Nobody in Modern History IV was seated when he entered the room; they
were all crowded between the door and his desk. He stood blinking,
wondering why they were giving him an ovation, and why Kendrick and
Dacre were so abjectly apologetic. Great heavens, did it take the
murder of the greatest Moslem since Saladin to convince people that he
wasn't crazy?
Before the period was over, Whitburn's secretary entered with a note
in the college president's hand and over his signature; requesting
Chalmers to come to his office immediately and without delay. Just
like that; expected him to walk right out of his class. He was
protesting as he entered the president's office. Whitburn cut him off
short.
"Doctor Chalmers,"--Whitburn had risen behind his desk as the door
opened--"I certainly hope that you can realize that there was nothing
but the most purely coincidental connection between the event featured
in this morning's newspapers and your performance, a month ago, in
Modern History Four," he began.
"I realize nothing of the sort. The death of Khalid ib'n Hussein is a
fact of history, unalterably set in its proper place in time-sequence.
It was a fact of history a month ago no less than today."
"So that's going to be your attitude; that your wild utterances of a
month ago have now been vindicated as fulfilled prophesies? And I
suppose you intend to exploit this--this coincidence--to the utmost.
The involvement of Blanley College in a mess of sensational publicity
means nothing to you, I presume."
"I haven't any idea what you're talking about."
"You mean to tell me that you didn't give this story to the local
newspaper, the _Valley Times_?" Whitburn demanded.
"I did not. I haven't mentioned the subject to anybody connected with
the _Times_, or anybody else, for that matter. Except my attorney, a
month ago, when you were threatening to repudiate the contract you
signed with me."
"I suppose I'm expected to take your word for that?"
"Yes, you are. Unless you care to call me a liar in so many words." He
moved a step closer. Lloyd Whitburn outweighed him by fifty pounds,
but most of the difference was fat. Whitburn must have realized that,
too.
"No, no; if you say you haven't talked about it to the _Valley Times_,
that's enough," he said hastily. "But somebody did. A reporter was
here not twenty minutes ago; he refused to say who had given him the
story, but he wanted to question me about it."
"What did you tell him?"
"I refused to make any statement whatever. I also called Colonel
Tighlman, the owner of the paper, and asked him, very reasonably, to
suppress the story. I thought that my own position and the importance
of Blanley College to this town entitled me to that much
consideration." Whitburn's face became almost purple. "He ... he
laughed at me!"
"Newspaper people don't like to be told to kill stories. Not even by
college presidents. That's only made things worse. Personally, I don't
relish the prospect of having this publicized, any more than you do. I
can assure you that I shall be most guarded if any of the _Times_
reporters talk to me about it, and if I have time to get back to my
class before the end of the period, I shall ask them, as a personal
favor, not to discuss the matter outside."
Whitburn didn't take the hint. Instead, he paced back and forth,
storming about the reporter, the newspaper owner, whoever had given
the story to the paper, and finally Chalmers himself. He was livid
with rage.
"You certainly can't imagine that when you made those remarks in class
you actually possessed any knowledge of a thing that was still a month
in the future," he spluttered. "Why, it's ridiculous! Utterly
preposterous!"
"Unusual, I'll admit. But the fact remains that I did. I should, of
course, have been more careful, and not confused future with past
events. The students didn't understand...."
Whitburn half-turned, stopping short.
"My God, man! You _are_ crazy!" he cried, horrified.
The period-bell was ringing as he left Whitburn's office; that meant
that the twenty-three students were scattering over the campus,
talking like mad. He shrugged. Keeping them quiet about a thing like
this wouldn't have been possible in any case. When he entered his
office, Stanly Weill was waiting for him. The lawyer drew him out into
the hallway quickly.
"For God's sake, have you been talking to the papers?" he demanded.
"After what I told you...."
"No, but somebody has." He told about the call to Whitburn's office,
and the latter's behavior. Weill cursed the college president
bitterly.
"Any time you want to get a story in the _Valley Times_, just order
Frank Tighlman not to print it. Well, if you haven't talked, don't."
"Suppose somebody asks me?"
"A reporter, no comment. Anybody else, none of his damn business. And
above all, don't let anybody finagle you into making any claims about
knowing the future. I thought we had this under control; now that
it's out in the open, what that fool Whitburn'll do is anybody's
guess."
Leonard Fitch met him as he entered the Faculty Club, sizzling with
excitement.
"Ed, this has done it!" he began, jubilantly. "This is one nobody can
laugh off. It's direct proof of precognition, and because of the
prominence of the event, everybody will hear about it. And it simply
can't be dismissed as coincidence...."
"Whitburn's trying to do that."
"Whitburn's a fool if he is," another man said calmly. Turning, he saw
that the speaker was Tom Smith, one of the math professors. "I figured
the odds against that being chance. There are a lot of variables that
might affect it one way or another, but ten to the fifteenth power is
what I get for a sort of median figure."
"Did you give that story to the _Valley Times?_" he asked Fitch,
suspicion rising and dragging anger up after it.
"Of course, I did," Fitch said. "I'll admit, I had to go behind your
back and have some of my postgrads get statements from the boys in
your history class, but you wouldn't talk about it yourself...."
Tom Smith was standing beside him. He was twenty years younger than
Chalmers, he was an amateur boxer, and he had good reflexes. He caught
Chalmers' arm as it was traveling back for an uppercut, and held it.
"Take it easy, Ed; you don't want to start a slugfest in here. This is
the Faculty Club; remember?"
"I won't, Tom; it wouldn't prove anything if I did." He turned to
Fitch. "I won't talk about sending your students to pump mine, but at
least you could have told me before you gave that story out."
"I don't know what you're sore about," Fitch defended himself. "I
believed in you when everybody else thought you were crazy, and if I
hadn't collected signed and dated statements from your boys, there'd
have been no substantiation. It happens that extrasensory perception
means as much to me as history does to you. I've believed in it ever
since I read about Rhine's work, when I was a kid. I worked in ESP for
a long time. Then I had a chance to get a full professorship by coming
here, and after I did, I found that I couldn't go on with it, because
Whitburn's president here, and he's a stupid old bigot with an
air-locked mind...."
"Yes." His anger died down as Fitch spoke. "I'm glad Tom stopped me
from making an ass of myself. I can see your side of it." Maybe that
was the curse of the professional intellectual, an ability to see
everybody's side of everything. He thought for a moment. "What else
did you do, beside hand this story to the _Valley Times?_ I'd better
hear all about it."
"I phoned the secretary of the American Institute of Psionics and
Parapsychology, as soon as I saw this morning's paper. With the
time-difference to the East Coast, I got him just as he reached his
office. He advised me to give the thing the widest possible publicity;
he thought that would advance the recognition and study of
parapsychology. A case like this can't be ignored; it will demand
serious study...."
"Well, you got your publicity, all right. I'm up to my neck in it."
There was an uproar outside. The doorman was saying, firmly:
"This is the Faculty Club, gentlemen; it's for members only. I don't
care if you gentlemen are the press, you simply cannot come in here."
"We're all up to our necks in it," Smith said. "Leonard, I don't care
what your motives were, you ought to have considered the effect on the
rest of us first."
"This place will be a madhouse," Handley complained. "How we're going
to get any of these students to keep their minds on their work...."
"I tell you, I don't know a confounded thing about it," Max
Pottgeiter's voice rose petulantly at the door. "Are you trying to
tell me that Professor Chalmers murdered some Arab? Ridiculous!"
  *  *  *  *  *
He ate hastily and without enjoyment, and slipped through the kitchen
and out the back door, cutting between two frat-houses and circling
back to Prescott Hall. On the way, he paused momentarily and chuckled.
The reporters, unable to storm the Faculty Club, had gone off in chase
of other game and had cornered Lloyd Whitburn in front of
Administration Center. They had a jeep with a sound-camera mounted on
it, and were trying to get something for telecast. After gesticulating
angrily, Whitburn broke away from them and dashed up the steps and
into the building. A campus policeman stopped those who tried to
follow.
His only afternoon class was American History III. He got through it
somehow, though the class wasn't able to concentrate on the
Reconstruction and the first election of Grover Cleveland. The halls
were free of reporters, at least, and when it was over he hurried to
the Library, going to the faculty reading-room in the rear, where he
could smoke. There was nobody there but old Max Pottgeiter, smoking a
cigar, his head bent over a book. The Medieval History professor
looked up.
"Oh, hello, Chalmers. What the deuce is going on around here? Has
everybody gone suddenly crazy?" he asked.
"Well, they seem to think I have," he said bitterly.
"They do? Stupid of them. What's all this about some Arab being shot?
I didn't know there were any Arabs around here."
"Not here. At Basra." He told Pottgeiter what had happened.
"Well! I'm sorry to hear about that," the old man said. "I have a
friend at Southern California, Bellingham, who knew Khalid very well.
Was in the Middle East doing some research on the Byzantine Empire;
Khalid was most helpful. Bellingham was quite impressed by him; said
he was a wonderful man, and a fine scholar. Why would anybody want to
kill a man like that?"
He explained in general terms. Pottgeiter nodded understandingly:
assassination was a familiar feature of the medieval political
landscape, too. Chalmers went on to elaborate. It was a relief to talk
to somebody like Pottgeiter, who wasn't bothered by the present
moment, but simply boycotted it. Eventually, the period-bell rang.
Pottgeiter looked at his watch, as from conditioned reflex, and then
rose, saying that he had a class and excusing himself. He would have
carried his cigar with him if Chalmers hadn't taken it away from him.
After Pottgeiter had gone Chalmers opened a book--he didn't notice
what it was--and sat staring unseeing at the pages. So the moving
knife-edge had come down on the end of Khalid ib'n Hussein's life;
what were the events in the next segment of time, and the segments to
follow? There would be bloody fighting all over the Middle East--with
consternation, he remembered that he had been talking about that to
Pottgeiter. The Turkish army would move in and try to restore order.
There would be more trouble in northern Iran, the Indian Communists
would invade Eastern Pakistan, and then the general war, so long
dreaded, would come. How far in the future that was he could not
"remember," nor how the nuclear-weapons stalemate that had so far
prevented it would be broken. He knew that today, and for years
before, nobody had dared start an all-out atomic war. Wars, now, were
marginal skirmishes, like the one in Indonesia, or the steady
underground conflict of subversion and sabotage that had come to be
called the Subwar. And with the United States already in possession of
a powerful Lunar base.... He wished he could "remember" how events
between the murder of Khalid and the Thirty Day's War had been spaced
chronologically. Something of that had come to him, after the incident
in Modern History IV, and he had driven it from his consciousness.
  *  *  *  *  *
He didn't dare go home where the reporters would be sure to find him.
He simply left the college, at the end of the school-day, and walked
without conscious direction until darkness gathered. This morning,
when he had seen the paper, he had said, and had actually believed,
that the news of the murder in Basra would put an end to the trouble
that had started a month ago in the Modern History class. It hadn't:
the trouble, it seemed, was only beginning. And with the newspapers,
and Whitburn, and Fitch, it could go on forever....
It was fully dark, now; his shadow fell ahead of him on the sidewalk,
lengthening as he passed under and beyond a street-light, vanishing as
he entered the stronger light of the one ahead. The windows of a cheap
cafe reminded him that he was hungry, and he entered, going to a table
and ordering something absently. There was a television screen over
the combination bar and lunch-counter. Some kind of a comedy
programme, at which an invisible studio-audience was laughing
immoderately and without apparent cause. The roughly dressed customers
along the counter didn't seem to see any more humor in it than he did.
Then his food arrived on the table and he began to eat without really
tasting it.
After a while, an alteration in the noises from the television
penetrated his consciousness; a news-program had come on, and he
raised his head. The screen showed a square in an Eastern city; the
voice was saying:
"... Basra, where Khalid ib'n Hussein was assassinated early this
morning--early afternoon, local time. This is the scene of the crime;
the body of the murderer has been removed, but you can still see the
stones with which he was pelted to death by the mob...."
A close-up of the square, still littered with torn-up paving-stones. A
Caliphate army officer, displaying the weapon--it was an old M3, all
right; Chalmers had used one of those things, himself, thirty years
before, and he and his contemporaries had called it a "grease-gun."
There were some recent pictures of Khalid, including one taken as he
left the plane on his return from Ankara. He watched, absorbed; it
was all exactly as he had "remembered" a month ago. It gratified him
to see that his future "memories" were reliable in detail as well as
generality.
"But the most amazing part of the story comes, not from Basra, but
from Blanley College, in California," the commentator was saying,
"where, it is revealed, the murder of Khalid was foretold, with
uncanny accuracy, a month ago, by a history professor, Doctor Edward
Chalmers...."
There was a picture of himself, in hat and overcoat, perfectly
motionless, as though a brief moving glimpse were being prolonged. A
glance at the background told him when and where it had been taken--a
year and a half ago, at a convention at Harvard. These telecast people
must save up every inch of old news-film they ever took. There were
views of Blanley campus, and interviews with some of the Modern
History IV boys, including Dacre and Kendrick. That was one of the
things they'd been doing with that jeep-mounted sound-camera, this
afternoon, then. The boys, some brashly, some embarrassedly, were
substantiating the fact that he had, a month ago, described
yesterday's event in detail. There was an interview with Leonard
Fitch; the psychology professor was trying to explain the phenomenon
of precognition in layman's terms, and making heavy going of it. And
there was the mobbing of Whitburn in front of Administration Center.
The college president was shouting denials of every question asked
him, and as he turned and fled, the guffaws of the reporters were
plainly audible.
An argument broke out along the counter.
"I don't believe it! How could anybody know all that about something
before it happened?"
"Well, you heard that-there professor, what was his name. An' you
heard all them boys...."
"Ah, college-boys; they'll do anything for a joke!"
"After refusing to be interviewed for telecast, the president of
Blanley College finally consented to hold a press conference in his
office, from which telecast cameras were barred. He denied the whole
story categorically and stated that the boys in Professor Chalmers'
class had concocted the whole thing as a hoax...."
"There! See what I told you!"
"... stating that Professor Chalmers is mentally unsound, and that
he has been trying for years to oust him from his position on the
Blanley faculty but has been unable to do so because of the provisions
of the Faculty Tenure Act of 1963. Most of his remarks were in the
nature of a polemic against this law, generally regarded as the
college professors' bill of rights. It is to be stated here that other
members of the Blanley faculty have unconditionally confirmed the fact
that Doctor Chalmers did make the statements attributed to him a month
ago, long before the death of Khalid ib'n Hussein...."
"Yah! How about _that_, now? How'ya gonna get around _that_?"
Beckoning the waitress, he paid his check and hurried out. Before he
reached the door, he heard a voice, almost stuttering with excitement:
"Hey! Look! That's _him_!"
He began to run. He was two blocks from the cafe before he slowed to a
walk again.
That night, he needed three shots of whiskey before he could get to
sleep.
  *  *  *  *  *
A delegation from the American Institute of Psionics and
Parapsychology reached Blanley that morning, having taken a
strato-plane from the East Coast. They had academic titles and degrees
that even Lloyd Whitburn couldn't ignore. They talked with Leonard
Fitch, and with the students from Modern History IV, and took
statements. It wasn't until after General European History II that
they caught up with Chalmers--an elderly man, with white hair and a
ruddy face; a young man who looked like a heavy-weight boxer; a
middle-aged man in tweeds who smoked a pipe and looked as though he
ought to be more interested in grouse-shooting and flower-gardening
than in clairvoyance and telepathy. The names of the first two meant
nothing to Chalmers. They were important names in their own field, but
it was not his field. The name of the third, who listened silently, he
did not catch.
"You understand, gentlemen, that I'm having some difficulties with the
college administration about this," he told them. "President Whitburn
has even gone so far as to challenge my fitness to hold a position
here."
"We've talked to him," the elderly man said. "It was not a very
satisfactory discussion."
"President Whitburn's fitness to hold his own position could very
easily be challenged," the young man added pugnaciously.
"Well, then, you see what my position is. I've consulted my attorney,
Mr. Weill and he has advised me to make absolutely no statements of
any sort about the matter."
"I understand," the eldest of the trio said. "But we're not the press,
or anything like that. We can assure you that anything you tell us
will be absolutely confidential." He looked inquiringly at the
middle-aged man in tweeds, who nodded silently. "We can understand
that the students in your modern history class are telling what is
substantially the truth?"
"If you're thinking about that hoax statement of Whitburn's, that's a
lot of idiotic drivel!" he said angrily. "I heard some of those boys
on the telecast, last night; except for a few details in which they
were confused, they all stated exactly what they heard me say in class
a month ago."
"And we assume,"--again he glanced at the man in tweeds--"that you had
no opportunity of knowing anything, at the time, about any actual
plot against Khalid's life?"
The man in tweeds broke silence for the first time. "You can assume
that. I don't even think this fellow Noureed knew anything about it,
then."
"Well, we'd like to know, as nearly as you're able to tell us, just
how you became the percipient of this knowledge of the future event of
the death of Khalid ib'n Hussein," the young man began. "Was it
through a dream, or a waking experience; did you visualize, or have an
auditory impression, or did it simply come into your mind...."
"I'm sorry, gentlemen." He looked at his watch. "I have to be going
somewhere, at once. In any case, I simply can't discuss the matter
with you. I appreciate your position; I know how I'd feel if data of
historical importance were being withheld from me. However, I trust
that you will appreciate my position and spare me any further
questioning."
That was all he allowed them to get out of him. They spent another few
minutes being polite to one another; he invited them to lunch at the
Faculty Club, and learned that they were lunching there as Fitch's
guests. They went away trying to hide their disappointment.
  *  *  *  *  *
The Psionics and Parapsychology people weren't the only delegation to
reach Blanley that day. Enough of the trustees of the college lived in
the San Francisco area to muster a quorum for a meeting the evening
before; a committee, including James Dacre, the father of the boy in
Modern History IV, was appointed to get the facts at first hand; they
arrived about noon. They talked to some of the students, spent some
time closeted with Whitburn, and were seen crossing the campus with
the Parapsychology people. They didn't talk to Chalmers or Fitch. In
the afternoon, Marjorie Fenner told Chalmers that his presence at a
meeting, to be held that evening in Whitburn's office, was requested.
The request, she said, had come from the trustees' committee, not from
Whitburn; she also told him that Fitch would be there. Chalmers
promptly phoned Stanly Weill.
"I'll be there along with you," the lawyer said. "If this trustees'
committee is running it, they'll realize that this is a matter in
which you're entitled to legal advice. I'll stop by your place and
pick you up.... You haven't been doing any talking, have you?"
He described the interview with the Psionics and Parapsychology
people.
"That was all right.... Was there a man with a mustache, in a brown
tweed suit, with them?"
"Yes. I didn't catch his name...."
"It's Cutler. He's an Army major; Central Intelligence. His crowd's
interested in whether you had any real advance information on this. He
was in to see me, just a while ago. I have the impression he'd like to
see this whole thing played down, so he'll be on our side, more or
less and for the time being. I'll be around to your place about eight;
in the meantime, don't do any more talking than you have to. I hope we
can get this straightened out, this evening. I'll have to go to Reno
in a day or so to see a client there...."
  *  *  *  *  *
The meeting in Whitburn's office had been set for eight-thirty; Weill
saw to it that they arrived exactly on time. As they got out of his
car at Administration Center and crossed to the steps, Chalmers had
the feeling of going to a duel, accompanied by his second. The
briefcase Weill was carrying may have given him the idea; it was flat
and square-cornered, the size and shape of an old case of dueling
pistols. He commented on it.
"Sound recorder," Weill said. "Loaded with a four-hour spool. No
matter how long this thing lasts, I'll have a record of it, if I want
to produce one in court."
Another party was arriving at the same time--the two Psionics and
Parapsychology people and the Intelligence major, who seemed to have
formed a working partnership. They all entered together, after a brief
and guardedly polite exchange of greetings. There were voices raised
in argument inside when they came to Whitburn's office. The college
president was trying to keep Handley, Tom Smith, and Max Pottgeiter
from entering his private room in the rear.
"It certainly is!" Handley was saying. "As faculty members, any
controversy involving establishment of standards of fitness to teach
under a tenure-contract concerns all of us, because any action taken
in this case may establish a precedent which could affect the validity
of our own contracts."
A big man with iron-gray hair appeared in the doorway of the private
office behind Whitburn; James Dacre.
"These gentlemen have a substantial interest in this, Doctor
Whitburn," he said. "If they're here as representatives of the college
faculty, they have every right to be present."
Whitburn stood aside. Handley, Smith and Pottgeiter went through the
door; the others followed. The other three members of the trustees'
committee were already in the room. A few minutes later, Leonard Fitch
arrived, also carrying a briefcase.
"Well, everybody seems to be here," Whitburn said, starting toward his
chair behind the desk. "We might as well get this started."
"Yes. If you'll excuse me, Doctor." Dacre stepped in front of him and
sat down at the desk. "I've been selected as chairman of this
committee; I believe I'm presiding here. Start the recorder,
somebody."
One of the other trustees went to the sound recorder beside the
desk--a larger but probably not more efficient instrument than the one
Weill had concealed in his briefcase--and flipped a switch. Then he
and his companions dragged up chairs to flank Dacre's, and the rest
seated themselves around the room. Old Pottgeiter took a seat next to
Chalmers. Weill opened the case on his lap, reached inside, and closed
it again.
"What are they trying to do, Ed?" Pottgeiter asked, in a loud whisper.
"Throw you off the faculty? They can't do that, can they?"
"I don't know, Max. We'll see...."
"This isn't any formal hearing, and nobody's on trial here," Dacre was
saying. "Any action will have to be taken by the board of trustees as
a whole, at a regularly scheduled meeting. All we're trying to do is
find out just what's happened here, and who, if anybody, is
responsible...."
"Well, there's the man who's responsible!" Whitburn cried, pointing at
Chalmers. "This whole thing grew out of his behavior in class a month
ago, and I'll remind you that at the time I demanded his resignation!"
"I thought it was Doctor Fitch, here, who gave the story to the
newspapers," one of the trustees, a man with red hair and a thin,
eyeglassed face, objected.
"Doctor Fitch acted as any scientist should, in making public what he
believed to be an important scientific discovery," the elder of the
two Parapsychology men said. "He believed, and so do we, that he had
discovered a significant instance of precognition--a case of real
prior knowledge of a future event. He made a careful and systematic
record of Professor Chalmers' statements, at least two weeks before
the occurrence of the event to which they referred. It is entirely due
to him that we know exactly what Professor Chalmers said and when he
said it."
"Yes," his younger colleague added, "and in all my experience I've
never heard anything more preposterous than this man Whitburn's
attempt, yesterday, to deny the fact."
"Well, we're convinced that Doctor Chalmers did in fact say what he's
alleged to have said, last month," Dacre began.
"Jim, I think we ought to get that established, for the record,"
another of the trustees put in. "Doctor Chalmers, is it true that you
spoke, in the past tense, about the death of Khalid ib'n Hussein in
one of your classes on the sixteenth of last month?"
Chalmers rose. "Yes, it is. And the next day, I was called into this
room by Doctor Whitburn, who demanded my resignation from the faculty
of this college because of it. Now, what I'd like to know is, why did
Doctor Whitburn, in this same room, deny, yesterday, that I'd said
anything of the sort, and accuse my students of concocting the story
after the event as a hoax."
"One of them being my son," Dacre added. "I'd like to hear an answer
to that, myself."
"So would I," Stanly Weill chimed in. "You know, my client has a good
case against Doctor Whitburn for libel."
Chalmers looked around the room. Of the thirteen men around him, only
Whitburn was an enemy. Some of the others were on his side, for one
reason or another, but none of them were friends. Weill was his
lawyer, obeying an obligation to a client which, at bottom, was an
obligation to his own conscience. Handley was afraid of the
possibility that a precedent might be established which would impair
his own tenure-contract. Fitch, and the two men from the Institute of
Psionics and Parapsychology were interested in him as a source of
study-material. Dacre resented a slur upon his son; he and the others
were interested in Blanley College as an institution, almost an
abstraction. And the major in mufti was probably worrying about the
consequences to military security of having a prophet at large. Then a
hand gripped his shoulder, and a voice whispered in his ear:
"That's good, Ed; don't let them scare you!"
Old Max Pottgeiter, at least, was a friend.
"Doctor Whitburn, I'm asking you, and I expect an answer, why did you
make such statements to the press, when you knew perfectly well that
they were false?" Dacre demanded sharply.
"I knew nothing of the kind!" Whitburn blustered, showing, under the
bluster, fear. "Yes, I demanded this man's resignation on the morning
of October Seventeenth, the day after this incident occurred. It had
come to my attention on several occasions that he was making wild and
unreasonable assertions in class, and subjecting himself, and with
himself the whole faculty of this college, to student ridicule. Why,
there was actually an editorial about it written by the student editor
of the campus paper, the _Black and Green_. I managed to prevent its
publication...." He went on at some length about that. "If I might be
permitted access to the drawers of my own desk," he added with
elephantine sarcasm, "I could show you the editorial in question."
"You needn't bother; I have a carbon copy," Dacre told him. "We've all
read it. If you did, at the time you suppressed it, you should have
known what Doctor Chalmers said in class."
"I knew he'd talked a lot of poppycock about a man who was still
living having been shot to death," Whitburn retorted. "And if
something of the sort actually happened, what of it? Somebody's always
taking a shot at one or another of these foreign dictators, and they
can't miss all the time."
"You claim this was pure coincidence?" Fitch demanded. "A ten-point
coincidence: Event of assassination, year of the event, place,
circumstances, name of assassin, nationality of assassin, manner of
killing, exact type of weapon used, guards killed and wounded along
with Khalid, and fate of the assassin. If that's a simple and
plausible coincidence, so's dealing ten royal flushes in succession in
a poker game. Tom, you figured that out; what did you say the odds
against it were?"
"Was all that actually stated by Doctor Chalmers a month ago?" one of
the trustees asked, incredulously.
"It absolutely was. Look here, Mr. Dacre, gentlemen." Fitch came
forward, unzipping his briefcase and pulling out papers. "Here are the
signed statements of each of Doctor Chalmers' twenty-three Modern
History Four students, all made and dated before the assassination.
You can refer to them as you please; they're in alphabetical order.
And here." He unfolded a sheet of graph paper a yard long and almost
as wide. "Here's a tabulated summary of the boys' statements. All
agreed on the first point, the fact of the assassination. All agreed
that the time was sometime this year. Twenty out of twenty-three
agreed on Basra as the place. Why, seven of them even remembered the
name of the assassin. That in itself is remarkable; Doctor Chalmers
has an extremely intelligent and attentive class."
"They're attentive because they know he's always likely to do
something crazy and make a circus out of himself," Whitburn
interjected.
"And this isn't the only instance of Doctor Chalmers' precognitive
ability," Fitch continued. "There have been a number of other cases...."
Chalmers jumped to his feet; Stanly Weill rose beside him, shoved the
cased sound-recorder into his hands, and pushed him back into his
seat.
"Gentlemen," the lawyer began, quietly but firmly and clearly. "This
is all getting pretty badly out of hand. After all, this isn't an
investigation of the actuality of precognition as a psychic
phenomenon. What I'd like to hear, and what I haven't heard yet, is
Doctor Whitburn's explanation of his contradictory statements that he
knew about my client's alleged remarks on the evening after they were
supposed to have been made and that, at the same time, the whole thing
was a hoax concocted by his students."
"Are you implying that I'm a liar?" Whitburn bristled.
"I'm pointing out that you made a pair of contradictory statements,
and I'm asking how you could do that knowingly and honestly," Weill
retorted.
"What I meant," Whitburn began, with exaggerated slowness, as though
speaking to an idiot, "was that yesterday, when those infernal
reporters were badgering me, I really thought that some of Professor
Chalmers' students had gotten together and given the _Valley Times_ an
exaggerated story about his insane maunderings a month ago. I hadn't
imagined that a member of the faculty had been so lacking in loyalty
to the college...."
"You couldn't imagine anybody with any more intellectual integrity
than you have!" Fitch fairly yelled at him.
"You're as crazy as Chalmers!" Whitburn yelled back. He turned to the
trustees. "You see the position I'm in, here, with this infernal
Higher Education Faculty Tenure Act? I have a madman on my faculty,
and can I get rid of him? No! I demand his resignation, and he laughs
at me and goes running for his lawyer! And he is a madman! Nobody but
a madman would talk the way he does. You think this Khalid ib'n
Hussein business is the only time he's done anything like this? Why, I
have a list of a dozen occasions when he's done something just as bad,
only he didn't have a lucky coincidence to back him up. Trying to get
books that don't exist out of the library, and then insisting that
they're standard textbooks. Talking about the revolt of the colonies
on Mars and Venus. Talking about something he calls the Terran
Federation, some kind of a world empire. Or something he calls
Operation Triple Cross, that saved the country during some fantastic
war he imagined...."
"_What did you say?_"
The question cracked out like a string of pistol shots. Everybody
turned. The quiet man in the brown tweed suit had spoken; now he
looked as though he were very much regretting it.
"Is there such a thing as Operation Triple Cross?" Fitch was asking.
"No, no. I never heard anything about that; that wasn't what I meant.
It was this Terran Federation thing," the major said, a trifle too
quickly and too smoothly. He turned to Chalmers. "You never did any
work for PSPB; did you ever talk to anybody who did?" he asked.
"I don't even know what the letters mean," Chalmers replied.
"Politico-Strategic Planning Board. It's all pretty hush-hush, but
this term Terran Federation is a tentative name for a proposed
organization to take the place of the U. N. if that organization
breaks up. It's nothing particularly important, and it only exists on
paper."
It won't exist only on paper very long, Chalmers thought. He was
wondering what Operation Triple Cross was; he had some notes on it,
but he had forgotten what they were.
"Maybe he did pick that up from somebody who'd talked indiscreetly,"
Whitburn conceded. "But the rest of this tommyrot! Why, he was talking
about how the city of Reno had been destroyed by an explosion and
fire, literally wiped off the map. There's an example for you!"
He'd forgotten about that, too. It had been a relatively minor
incident in the secret struggle of the Subwar; now he remembered
having made a note about it. He was sure that it followed closely
after the assassination of Khalid ib'n Hussein. He turned quickly to
Weill.
"Didn't you say you had to go to Reno in a day or so?" he asked.
Weill hushed him urgently, pointing with his free hand to the
recorder. The exchange prevented him from noticing that Max Pottgeiter
had risen, until the old man was speaking.
"Are you trying to tell these people that Professor Chalmers is
crazy?" he was demanding. "Why, he has one of the best minds on the
campus. I was talking to him only yesterday, in the back room at the
Library. You know," he went on apologetically, "my subject is Medieval
History; I don't pay much attention to what's going on in the
contemporary world, and I didn't understand, really, what all this
excitement was about. But he explained the whole thing to me, and did
it in terms that I could grasp, drawing some excellent parallels with
the Byzantine Empire and the Crusades. All about the revolt at
Damascus, and the sack of Beirut, and the war between Jordan and Saudi
Arabia, and how the Turkish army intervened, and the invasion of
Pakistan...."
"When did all this happen?" one of the trustees demanded.
Pottgeiter started to explain; Chalmers realized, sickly, how much of
his future history he had poured into the trusting ear of the old
medievalist, the day before.
"Good Lord, man; don't you read the papers at all?" another of the
trustees asked.
"No! And I don't read inside-dope magazines, or science fiction. I
read carefully substantiated facts. And I know when I'm talking to a
sane and reasonable man. It isn't a common experience, around here."
Dacre passed a hand over his face. "Doctor Whitburn," he said, "I must
admit that I came to this meeting strongly prejudiced against you, and
I'll further admit that your own behavior here has done very little to
dispel that prejudice. But I'm beginning to get some idea of what you
have to contend with, here at Blanley, and I find that I must make a
lot of allowances. I had no idea.... Simply no idea at all."
"Look, you're getting a completely distorted picture of this, Mr.
Dacre," Fitch broke in. "It's precisely as I believed; Doctor Chalmers
is an unusually gifted precognitive percipient. You've seen,
gentlemen, how his complicated chain of precognitions about the death
of Khalid has been proven veridical; I'd stake my life that every one
of these precognitions will be similarly verified. And I'll stake my
professional reputation that the man is perfectly sane. Of course,
abnormal psychology and psychopathology aren't my subjects, but...."
"They're not my subjects, either," Whitburn retorted, "but I know a
lunatic by his ravings."
"Doctor Fitch is taking an entirely proper attitude," Pottgeiter said,
"in pointing out that abnormal psychology is a specialized branch,
outside his own field. I wouldn't dream, myself, of trying to offer a
decisive opinion on some point of Roman, or Babylonian, history. Well,
if the question of Doctor Chalmers' sanity is at issue here, let's
consult somebody who specializes in insanity. I don't believe that
anybody here is qualified even to express an opinion on that subject,
Doctor Whitburn least of all."
Whitburn turned on him angrily. "Oh, shut up, you doddering old fool!"
he shouted. "Look; there's another of them!" he told the trustees.
"Another deadhead on the faculty that this Tenure Law keeps me from
getting rid of. He's as bad as Chalmers, himself. You just heard that
string of nonsense he was spouting. Why, his courses have been noted
among the students for years as snap courses in which nobody ever has
to do any work...."
Chalmers was on his feet again, thoroughly angry. Abuse of himself he
could take; talking that way about gentle, learned, old Pottgeiter
was something else.
"I think Doctor Pottgeiter's said the most reasonable thing I've heard
since I came in here," he declared. "If my sanity is to be questioned,
I insist that it be questioned by somebody qualified to do so."
[Illustration: Had the sane restrained the insane, or was it the other
way around?]
Weill set his recorder on the floor and jumped up beside him, trying
to haul him back into his seat.
"For God's sake, man! Sit down and shut up!" he hissed.
Chalmers shook off his hand. "No, I won't shut up! This is the only
way to settle this, once and for all. And when my sanity's been
vindicated, I'm going to sue this fellow...."
Whitburn started to make some retort, then stopped short. After a
moment, he smiled nastily.
"Do I understand, Doctor Chalmers, that you would be willing to submit
to psychiatric examination?" he asked.
"Don't agree; you're putting your foot in a trap!" Weill told him
urgently.
"Of course, I agree, as long as the examination is conducted by a
properly qualified psychiatrist."
"How about Doctor Hauserman at Northern State Mental Hospital?"
Whitburn asked quickly. "Would you agree to an examination by him?"
"Excellent!" Fitch exclaimed. "One of the best men in the field. I'd
accept his opinion unreservedly."
Weill started to object again; Chalmers cut him off. "Doctor Hauserman
will be quite satisfactory to me. The only question is, would he be
available?"
"I think he would," Dacre said, glancing at his watch. "I wonder if he
could be reached now." He got to his feet. "Telephone in your outer
office, Doctor Whitburn? Fine. If you gentlemen will excuse me...."
It was a good fifteen minutes before he returned, smiling.
"Well, gentlemen, it's all arranged," he said. "Doctor Hauserman is
quite willing to examine Doctor Chalmers--with the latter's consent,
of course."
"He'll have it. In writing, if he wishes."
"Yes, I assured him on that point. He'll be here about noon
tomorrow--it's a hundred and fifty miles from the hospital, but the
doctor flies his own plane--and the examination can start at two in
the afternoon. He seems familiar with the facilities of the
psychology department, here; I assured him that they were at his
disposal. Will that be satisfactory to you, Doctor Chalmers?"
"I have a class at that time, but one of the instructors can take it
over--if holding classes will be possible around here tomorrow," he
said. "Now, if you gentlemen will pardon me, I think I'll go home and
get some sleep."
  *  *  *  *  *
Weill came up to the apartment with him. He mixed a couple of drinks
and they went into the living room with them.
"Just in case you don't know what you've gotten yourself into," Weill
said, "this Hauserman isn't any ordinary couch-pilot; he's the state
psychiatrist. If he gets the idea you aren't sane, he can commit you
to a hospital, and I'll bet that's exactly what Whitburn had in mind
when he suggested him. And I don't trust this man Dacre. I thought he
was on our side, at the start, but that was before your friends got
into the act." He frowned into his drink. "And I don't like the way
that Intelligence major was acting, toward the last. If he thinks you
know something you are not supposed to, a mental hospital may be his
idea of a good place to put you away."
"You don't think this man Hauserman would allow himself to be
influenced ...? No. You just don't think I'm sane. Do you?"
"I know what Hauserman'll think. He'll think this future history
business is a classical case of systematized schizoid delusion. I wish
I'd never gotten into this case. I wish I'd never even heard of you!
And another thing; in case you get past Hauserman all right, you can
forget about that damage-suit bluff of mine. You would not stand a
chance with it in court."
"In spite of what happened to Khalid?"
"After tomorrow, I won't stay in the same room with anybody who even
mentions that name to me. Well, win or lose, it'll be over tomorrow
and then I can leave here."
"Did you tell me you were going to Reno?" Chalmers asked. "Don't do
it. You remember Whitburn mentioning how I spoke about an explosion
there? It happened just a couple of days after the murder of Khalid.
There was--will be--a trainload of high explosives in the railroad
yard; it'll be the biggest non-nuclear explosion since the _Mont
Blanc_ blew up in Halifax harbor in World War One...."
Weill threw his drink into the fire; he must have avoided throwing the
glass in with it by a last-second exercise of self-control.
"Well," he said, after a brief struggle to master himself. "One thing
about the legal profession; you do hear the damnedest things!... Good
night, Professor. And try--please try, for the sake of your poor
harried lawyer--to keep your mouth shut about things like that, at
least till after you get through with Hauserman. And when you're
talking to him, don't, don't, for heaven's sake, _don't_, volunteer
anything!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The room was a pleasant, warmly-colored, place. There was a desk, much
like the ones in the classrooms, and six or seven wicker armchairs. A
lot of apparatus had been pushed back along the walls; the dust-covers
were gay cretonne. There was a couch, with more apparatus, similarly
covered, beside it. Hauserman was seated at the desk when Chalmers
entered.
He rose, and they shook hands. A man of about his own age,
smooth-faced, partially bald. Chalmers tried to guess something of the
man's nature from his face, but could read nothing. A face well
trained to keep its owner's secrets.
"Something to smoke, Professor," he began, offering his cigarette
case.
"My pipe, if you don't mind." He got it out and filled it.
"Any of those chairs," Hauserman said, gesturing toward them.
They were all arranged to face the desk. He sat down, lighting his
pipe. Hauserman nodded approvingly; he was behaving calmly, and didn't
need being put at ease. They talked at random--at least, Hauserman
tried to make it seem so--for some time about his work, his book about
the French Revolution, current events. He picked his way carefully
through the conversation, alert for traps which the psychiatrist might
be laying for him. Finally, Hauserman said:
"Would you mind telling me just why you felt it advisable to request a
psychiatric examination, Professor?"
"I didn't request it. But when the suggestion was made, by one of my
friends, in reply to some aspersions of my sanity, I agreed to it."
"Good distinction. And why was your sanity questioned? I won't deny
that I had heard of this affair, here, before Mr. Dacre called me,
last evening, but I'd like to hear your version of it."
He went into that, from the original incident in Modern History IV,
choosing every word carefully, trying to concentrate on making a good
impression upon Hauserman, and at the same time finding that more
"memories" of the future were beginning to seep past the barrier of
his consciousness. He tried to dam them back; when he could not, he
spoke with greater and greater care lest they leak into his speech.
"I can't recall the exact manner in which I blundered into it. The
fact that I did make such a blunder was because I was talking
extemporaneously and had wandered ahead of my text. I was trying to
show the results of the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after the First
World War, and the partition of the Middle East into a loose
collection of Arab states, and the passing of British and other
European spheres of influence following the Second. You know, when you
consider it, the Islamic Caliphate was inevitable; the surprising
thing is that it was created by a man like Khalid...."
He was talking to gain time, and he suspected that Hauserman knew it.
The "memories" were coming into his mind more and more strongly; it
was impossible to suppress them. The period of anarchy following
Khalid's death would be much briefer, and much more violent, than he
had previously thought. Tallal ib'n Khalid would be flying from
England even now; perhaps he had already left the plane to take refuge
among the black tents of his father's Bedouins. The revolt at Damascus
would break out before the end of the month; before the end of the
year, the whole of Syria and Lebanon would be in bloody chaos, and the
Turkish army would be on the march.
"Yes. And you allowed yourself to be carried a little beyond the
present moment, into the future, without realizing it? Is that it?"
"Something like that," he replied, wide awake to the trap Hauserman
had set, and fearful that it might be a blind, to disguise the real
trap. "History follows certain patterns. I'm not a Toynbean, by any
manner of means, but any historian can see that certain forces
generally tend to produce similar effects. For instance, space travel
is now a fact; our government has at present a military base on Luna.
Within our lifetimes--certainly within the lifetimes of my
students--there will be explorations and attempts at colonization on
Mars and Venus. You believe that, Doctor?"
"Oh, unreservedly. I'm not supposed to talk about it, but I did some
work on the Philadelphia Project, myself. I'd say that every major
problem of interplanetary flight had been solved before the first
robot rocket was landed on Luna."
"Yes. And when Mars and Venus are colonized, there will be the same
historic situations, at least in general shape, as arose when the
European powers were colonizing the New World, or, for that matter,
when the Greek city-states were throwing out colonies across the
Aegean. That's the sort of thing we call projecting the past into the
future through the present."
Hauserman nodded. "But how about the details? Things like the
assassination of a specific personage. How can you extrapolate to a
thing like that?"
"Well...." More "memories" were coming to the surface; he tried to
crowd them back. "I do my projecting in what you might call
fictionalized form; try to fill in the details from imagination. In
the case of Khalid, I was trying to imagine what would happen if his
influence were suddenly removed from Near Eastern and Middle Eastern,
affairs. I suppose I constructed an imaginary scene of his
assassination...."
He went on at length. Mohammed and Noureed were common enough names.
The Middle East was full of old U. S. weapons. Stoning was the
traditional method of execution; it diffused responsibility so that no
individual could be singled out for blood-feud vengeance.
"You have no idea how disturbed I was when the whole thing happened,
exactly as I had described it," he continued. "And worst of all, to
me, was this Intelligence officer showing up; I thought I was really
in for it!"
"Then you've never really believed that you had real knowledge of the
future?"
"I'm beginning to, since I've been talking to these Psionics and
Parapsychology people," he laughed. It sounded, he hoped, like a
natural and unaffected laugh. "They seem to be convinced that I
have."
There would be an Eastern-inspired uprising in Azerbaijan by the
middle of the next year; before autumn, the Indian Communists would
make their fatal attempt to seize East Pakistan. The Thirty Days' War
would be the immediate result. By that time, the Lunar Base would be
completed and ready; the enemy missiles would be aimed primarily at
the rocketports from which it was supplied. Delivered without warning,
it should have succeeded--except that every rocketport had its secret
duplicate and triplicate. That was Operation Triple Cross; no wonder
Major Cutler had been so startled at the words, last evening. The
enemy would be utterly overwhelmed under the rain of missiles from
across space, but until the moon-rockets began to fall, the United
States would suffer grievously.
"Honestly, though, I feel sorry for my friend Fitch," he added. "He's
going to be frightfully let down when some more of my alleged
prophecies misfire on him. But I really haven't been deliberately
deceiving him."
And Blanley College was at the center of one of the areas which would
receive the worst of the thermonuclear hell to come. And it would be a
little under a year....
"And that's all there is to it!" Hauserman exclaimed, annoyance in his
voice. "I'm amazed that this man Whitburn allowed a thing like this to
assume the proportions it did. I must say that I seem to have gotten
the story about this business in a very garbled form indeed." He
laughed shortly. "I came here convinced that you were mentally
unbalanced. I hope you won't take that the wrong way, Professor," he
hastened to add. "In my profession, anything can be expected. A good
psychiatrist can never afford to forget how sharp and fine is the
knife-edge."
"The knife-edge!" The words startled him. He had been thinking, at
that moment, of the knife-edge, slicing moment after moment
relentlessly away from the future, into the past, at each slice coming
closer and closer to the moment when the missiles of the Eastern Axis
would fall. "I didn't know they still resorted to surgery, in mental
cases," he added, trying to cover his break.
"Oh, no; all that sort of thing is as irrevocably discarded as the
whips and shackles of Bedlam. I meant another kind of knife-edge; the
thin, almost invisible, line which separates sanity from non-sanity.
From madness, to use a deplorable lay expression." Hauserman lit
another cigarette. "Most minds are a lot closer to it than their
owners suspect, too. In fact, Professor, I was so convinced that yours
had passed over it that I brought with me a commitment form, made out
all but my signature, for you." He took it from his pocket and laid it
on the desk. "The modern equivalent of the _lettre-de-cachet_, I
suppose the author of a book on the French Revolution would call it. I
was all ready to certify you as mentally unsound, and commit you to
Northern State Mental Hospital."
Chalmers sat erect in his chair. He knew where that was; on the other
side of the mountains, in the one part of the state completely
untouched by the H-bombs of the Thirty Days' War. Why, the town
outside which the hospital stood had been a military headquarters
during the period immediately after the bombings, and the center from
which all the rescue work in the state had been directed.
"And you thought you could commit me to Northern State!" he demanded,
laughing scornfully, and this time he didn't try to make the laugh
sound natural and unaffected. "You--confine _me_, anywhere? Confine a
poor old history professor's body, yes, but that isn't me. I'm
universal; I exist in all space-time. When this old body I'm wearing
now was writing that book on the French Revolution, I was in Paris,
watching it happen, from the fall of the Bastile to the Ninth
Thermidor. I was in Basra, and saw that crazed tool of the Axis shoot
down Khalid ib'n Hussein--and the professor talked about it a month
before it happened. I have seen empires rise and stretch from star to
star across the Galaxy, and crumble and fall. I have seen...."
Doctor Hauserman had gotten his pen out of his pocket and was signing
the commitment form with one hand; with the other, he pressed a button
on the desk. A door at the rear opened, and a large young man in a
white jacket entered.
"You'll have to go away for a while, Professor," Hauserman was telling
him, much later, after he had allowed himself to become calm again.
"For how long, I don't know. Maybe a year or so."
"You mean to Northern State Mental?"
"Well.... Yes, Professor. You've had a bad crack-up. I don't suppose
you realize how bad. You've been working too hard; harder than your
nervous system could stand. It's been too much for you."
"You mean, I'm nuts?"
"Please, Professor. I deplore that sort of terminology. You've had a
severe psychological breakdown...."
"Will I be able to have books, and papers, and work a little? I
couldn't bear the prospect of complete idleness."
"That would be all right, if you didn't work too hard."
"And could I say good-bye to some of my friends?"
Hauserman nodded and asked, "Who?"
"Well, Professor Pottgeiter...."
"He's outside now. He was inquiring about you."
"And Stanly Weill, my attorney. Not business; just to say good-bye."
"Oh, I'm sorry, Professor. He's not in town, now. He left almost
immediately after.... After...."
"After he found out I was crazy for sure? Where'd he go?"
"To Reno; he took the plane at five o'clock."
Weill wouldn't have believed, anyhow; no use trying to blame himself
for that. But he was as sure that he would never see Stanly Weill
alive again as he was that the next morning the sun would rise. He
nodded impassively.
"Sorry he couldn't stay. Can I see Max Pottgeiter alone?"
"Yes, of course, Professor."
Old Pottgeiter came in, his face anguished. "Ed! It isn't true," he
stammered. "I won't believe that it's true."
"What, Max?"
"That you're crazy. Nobody can make me believe that."
He put his hand on the old man's shoulder. "Confidentially, Max,
neither do I. But don't tell anybody I'm not. It's a secret."
Pottgeiter looked troubled. For a moment, he seemed to be wondering if
he mightn't be wrong and Hauserman and Whitburn and the others right.
"Max, do you believe in me?" he asked. "Do you believe that I knew
about Khalid's assassination a month before it happened?"
"It's a horribly hard thing to believe," Pottgeiter admitted. "But,
dammit, Ed, you did! I know, medieval history is full of stories
about prophecies being fulfilled. I always thought those stories were
just legends that grew up after the event. And, of course, he's about
a century late for me, but there was Nostradamus. Maybe those old
prophecies weren't just _ex post facto_ legends, after all. Yes. After
Khalid, I'll believe that."
"All right. I'm saying, now, that in a few days there'll be a bad
explosion at Reno, Nevada. Watch the papers and the telecast for it.
If it happens, that ought to prove it. And you remember what I told
you about the Turks annexing Syria and Lebanon?" The old man nodded.
"When that happens, get away from Blanley. Come up to the town where
Northern State Mental Hospital is, and get yourself a place to live,
and stay there. And try to bring Marjorie Fenner along with you. Will
you do that, Max?"
"If you say so." His eyes widened. "Something bad's going to happen
here?"
"Yes, Max. Something very bad. You promise me you will?"
"Of course, Ed. You know, you're the only friend I have around here.
You and Marjorie. I'll come, and bring her along."
"Here's the key to my apartment." He got it from his pocket and gave
it to Pottgeiter, with instructions. "Everything in the filing cabinet
on the left of my desk. And don't let anybody else see any of it. Keep
it safe for me."
The large young man in the white coat entered.
THE END
The World That Couldn't Be
By CLIFFORD D. SIMAK
Like every farmer on every planet, Duncan had to hunt down
anything that damaged his crops--even though he was aware
this was--
*  *  *  *  *
The tracks went up one row and down another, and in those rows the
_vua_ plants had been sheared off an inch or two above the ground. The
raider had been methodical; it had not wandered about haphazardly, but
had done an efficient job of harvesting the first ten rows on the west
side of the field. Then, having eaten its fill, it had angled off into
the bush--and that had not been long ago, for the soil still trickled
down into the great pug marks, sunk deep into the finely cultivated
loam.
[Illustration]
Somewhere a sawmill bird was whirring through a log, and down in one
of the thorn-choked ravines, a choir of chatterers was clicking
through a ghastly morning song. It was going to be a scorcher of a
day. Already the smell of desiccated dust was rising from the ground
and the glare of the newly risen sun was dancing off the bright leaves
of the hula-trees, making it appear as if the bush were filled with a
million flashing mirrors.
Gavin Duncan hauled a red bandanna from his pocket and mopped his
face.
"No, mister," pleaded Zikkara, the native foreman of the farm. "You
cannot do it, mister. You do not hunt a Cytha."
"The hell I don't," said Duncan, but he spoke in English and not the
native tongue.
He stared out across the bush, a flat expanse of sun-cured grass
interspersed with thickets of hula-scrub and thorn and occasional
groves of trees, criss-crossed by treacherous ravines and spotted with
infrequent waterholes.
It would be murderous out there, he told himself, but it shouldn't
take too long. The beast probably would lay up shortly after its
pre-dawn feeding and he'd overhaul it in an hour or two. But if he
failed to overhaul it, then he must keep on.
"Dangerous," Zikkara pointed out. "No one hunts the Cytha."
"I do," Duncan said, speaking now in the native language. "I hunt
anything that damages my crop. A few nights more of this and there
would be nothing left."
  *  *  *  *  *
Jamming the bandanna back into his pocket, he tilted his hat lower
across his eyes against the sun.
"It might be a long chase, mister. It is the _skun_ season now. If you
were caught out there...."
"Now listen," Duncan told it sharply. "Before I came, you'd feast one
day, then starve for days on end; but now you eat each day. And you
like the doctoring. Before, when you got sick, you died. Now you get
sick, I doctor you, and you live. You like staying in one place,
instead of wandering all around."
"Mister, we like all this," said Zikkara, "but we do not hunt the
Cytha."
"If we do not hunt the Cytha, we lose all this," Duncan pointed out.
"If I don't make a crop, I'm licked. I'll have to go away. Then what
happens to you?"
"We will grow the corn ourselves."
"That's a laugh," said Duncan, "and you know it is. If I didn't kick
your backsides all day long, you wouldn't do a lick of work. If I
leave, you go back to the bush. Now let's go and get that Cytha."
"But it is such a little one, mister! It is such a young one! It is
scarcely worth the trouble. It would be a shame to kill it."
Probably just slightly smaller than a horse, thought Duncan, watching
the native closely.
It's scared, he told himself. It's scared dry and spitless.
"Besides, it must have been most hungry. Surely, mister, even a Cytha
has the right to eat."
"Not from my crop," said Duncan savagely. "You know why we grow the
_vua_, don't you? You know it is great medicine. The berries that it
grows cures those who are sick inside their heads. My people need that
medicine--need it very badly. And what is more, out there--" he swept
his arm toward the sky--"out there they pay very much for it."
"But, mister...."
"I tell you this," said Duncan gently, "you either dig me up a
bush-runner to do the tracking for me or you can all get out, the kit
and caboodle of you. I can get other tribes to work the farm."
"No, mister!" Zikkara screamed in desperation.
"You have your choice," Duncan told it coldly.
  *  *  *  *  *
He plodded back across the field toward the house. Not much of a house
as yet. Not a great deal better than a native shack. But someday it
would be, he told himself. Let him sell a crop or two and he'd build a
house that would really be a house. It would have a bar and swimming
pool and a garden filled with flowers, and at last, after years of
wandering, he'd have a home and broad acres and everyone, not just one
lousy tribe, would call him mister.
Gavin Duncan, planter, he said to himself, and liked the sound of it.
Planter on the planet Layard. But not if the Cytha came back night
after night and ate the _vua_ plants.
He glanced over his shoulder and saw that Zikkara was racing for the
native village.
Called their bluff, Duncan informed himself with satisfaction.
He came out of the field and walked across the yard, heading for the
house. One of Shotwell's shirts was hanging on the clothes-line, limp
in the breathless morning.
Damn the man, thought Duncan. Out here mucking around with those
stupid natives, always asking questions, always under foot. Although,
to be fair about it, that was Shotwell's job. That was what the
Sociology people had sent him out to do.
Duncan came up to the shack, pushed the door open and entered.
Shotwell, stripped to the waist, was at the wash bench.
Breakfast was cooking on the stove, with an elderly native acting as
cook.
Duncan strode across the room and took down the heavy rifle from its
peg. He slapped the action open, slapped it shut again.
Shotwell reached for a towel.
"What's going on?" he asked.
"Cytha got into the field."
"Cytha?"
"A kind of animal," said Duncan. "It ate ten rows of _vua_."
"Big? Little? What are its characteristics?"
The native began putting breakfast on the table. Duncan walked to the
table, laid the rifle across one corner of it and sat down. He poured
a brackish liquid out of a big stew pan into their cups.
God, he thought, what I would give for a cup of coffee.
  *  *  *  *  *
Shotwell pulled up his chair. "You didn't answer me. What is a Cytha
like?"
"I wouldn't know," said Duncan.
"Don't know? But you're going after it, looks like, and how can you
hunt it if you don't know--"
"Track it. The thing tied to the other end of the trail is sure to be
the Cytha. Well find out what it's like once we catch up to it."
"We?"
"The natives will send up someone to do the tracking for me. Some of
them are better than a dog."
"Look, Gavin. I've put you to a lot of trouble and you've been decent
with me. If I can be any help, I would like to go."
"Two make better time than three. And we have to catch this Cytha fast
or it might settle down to an endurance contest."
"All right, then. Tell me about the Cytha."
Duncan poured porridge gruel into his bowl, handed the pan to
Shotwell. "It's a sort of special thing. The natives are scared to
death of it. You hear a lot of stories about it. Said to be
unkillable. It's always capitalized, always a proper noun. It has been
reported at different times from widely scattered places."
"No one's ever bagged one?"
"Not that I ever heard of." Duncan patted the rifle. "Let me get a
bead on it."
He started eating, spooning the porridge into his mouth, munching on
the stale corn bread left from the night before. He drank some of the
brackish beverage and shuddered.
"Some day," he said, "I'm going to scrape together enough money to buy
a pound of coffee. You'd think--"
"It's the freight rates," Shotwell said. "I'll send you a pound when I
go back."
"Not at the price they'd charge to ship it out," said Duncan. "I
wouldn't hear of it."
They ate in silence for a time. Finally Shotwell said: "I'm getting
nowhere, Gavin. The natives are willing to talk, but it all adds up to
nothing."
"I tried to tell you that. You could have saved your time."
Shotwell shook his head stubbornly. "There's an answer, a logical
explanation. It's easy enough to say you cannot rule out the sexual
factor, but that's exactly what has happened here on Layard. It's easy
to exclaim that a sexless animal, a sexless race, a sexless planet is
impossible, but that is what we have. Somewhere there is an answer and
I have to find it."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Now hold up a minute," Duncan protested. "There's no use blowing a
gasket. I haven't got the time this morning to listen to your
lecture."
"But it's not the lack of sex that worries me entirely," Shotwell
said, "although it's the central factor. There are subsidiary
situations deriving from that central fact which are most intriguing."
"I have no doubt of it," said Duncan, "but if you please--"
"Without sex, there is no basis for the family, and without the family
there is no basis for a tribe, and yet the natives have an elaborate
tribal setup, with taboos by way of regulation. Somewhere there must
exist some underlying, basic unifying factor, some common loyalty,
some strange relationship which spells out to brotherhood."
"Not brotherhood," said Duncan, chuckling. "Not even sisterhood. You
must watch your terminology. The word you want is ithood."
The door pushed open and a native walked in timidly.
"Zikkara said that mister want me," the native told them. "I am Sipar.
I can track anything but screamers, stilt-birds, longhorns and
donovans. Those are my taboos."
"I am glad to hear that," Duncan replied. "You have no Cytha taboo,
then."
"Cytha!" yipped the native. "Zikkara did not tell me Cytha!"
Duncan paid no attention. He got up from the table and went to the
heavy chest that stood against one wall. He rummaged in it and came
out with a pair of binoculars, a hunting knife and an extra drum of
ammunition. At the kitchen cupboard, he rummaged once again, filling a
small leather sack with a gritty powder from a can he found.
"Rockahominy," he explained to Shotwell. "Emergency rations thought up
by the primitive North American Indians. Parched corn, ground fine.
It's no feast exactly, but it keeps a man going."
"You figure you'll be gone that long?"
"Maybe overnight. I don't know. Won't stop until I get it. Can't
afford to. It could wipe me out in a few days."
"Good hunting," Shotwell said. "I'll hold the fort."
Duncan said to Sipar: "Quit sniveling and come on."
He picked up the rifle, settled it in the crook of his arm. He kicked
open the door and strode out.
Sipar followed meekly.
II
Duncan got his first shot late in the afternoon of that first day.
In the middle of the morning, two hours after they had left the farm,
they had flushed the Cytha out of its bed in a thick ravine. But there
had been no chance for a shot. Duncan saw no more than a huge black
blur fade into the bush.
Through the bake-oven afternoon, they had followed its trail, Sipar
tracking and Duncan bringing up the rear, scanning every piece of
cover, with the sun-hot rifle always held at ready.
Once they had been held up for fifteen minutes while a massive donovan
tramped back and forth, screaming, trying to work up its courage for
attack. But after a quarter hour of showing off, it decided to behave
itself and went off at a shuffling gallop.
Duncan watched it go with a lot of thankfulness. It could soak up a
lot of lead, and for all its awkwardness, it was handy with its feet
once it set itself in motion. Donovans had killed a lot of men in the
twenty years since Earthmen had come to Layard.
With the beast gone, Duncan looked around for Sipar. He found it fast
asleep beneath a hula-shrub. He kicked the native awake with something
less than gentleness and they went on again.
The bush swarmed with other animals, but they had no trouble with
them.
Sipar, despite its initial reluctance, had worked well at the
trailing. A misplaced bunch of grass, a twig bent to one side, a
displaced stone, the faintest pug mark were Sipar's stock in trade. It
worked like a lithe, well-trained hound. This bush country was its
special province; here it was at home.
With the sun dropping toward the west, they had climbed a long, steep
hill and as they neared the top of it, Duncan hissed at Sipar. The
native looked back over its shoulder in surprise. Duncan made motions
for it to stop tracking.
The native crouched and as Duncan went past it, he saw that a look of
agony was twisting its face. And in the look of agony he thought he
saw as well a touch of pleading and a trace of hatred. It's scared,
just like the rest of them, Duncan told himself. But what the native
thought or felt had no significance; what counted was the beast ahead.
Duncan went the last few yards on his belly, pushing the gun ahead of
him, the binoculars bumping on his back. Swift, vicious insects ran
out of the grass and swarmed across his hands and arms and one got on
his face and bit him.
  *  *  *  *  *
He made it to the hilltop and lay there, looking at the sweep of land
beyond. It was more of the same, more of the blistering, dusty
slogging, more of thorn and tangled ravine and awful emptiness.
He lay motionless, watching for a hint of motion, for the fitful
shadow, for any wrongness in the terrain that might be the Cytha.
But there was nothing. The land lay quiet under the declining sun. Far
on the horizon, a herd of some sort of animals was grazing, but there
was nothing else.
Then he saw the motion, just a flicker, on the knoll ahead--about
halfway up.
He laid the rifle carefully on the ground and hitched the binoculars
around. He raised them to his eyes and moved them slowly back and
forth. The animal was there where he had seen the motion.
It was resting, looking back along the way that it had come, watching
for the first sign of its trailers. Duncan tried to make out the size
and shape, but it blended with the grass and the dun soil and he could
not be sure exactly what it looked like.
He let the glasses down and now that he had located it, he could
distinguish its outline with the naked eye.
His hand reached out and slid the rifle to him. He fitted it to his
shoulder and wriggled his body for closer contact with the ground. The
cross-hairs centered on the faint outline on the knoll and then the
beast stood up.
It was not as large as he had thought it might be--perhaps a little
larger than Earth lion-size, but it certainly was no lion. It was a
square-set thing and black and inclined to lumpiness and it had an
awkward look about it, but there were strength and ferociousness as
well.
Duncan tilted the muzzle of the rifle so that the cross-hairs centered
on the massive neck. He drew in a breath and held it and began the
trigger squeeze.
The rifle bucked hard against his shoulder and the report hammered in
his head and the beast went down. It did not lurch or fall; it simply
melted down and disappeared, hidden in the grass.
"Dead center," Duncan assured himself.
He worked the mechanism and the spent cartridge case flew out. The
feeding mechanism snicked and the fresh shell clicked as it slid into
the breech.
He lay for a moment, watching. And on the knoll where the thing had
fallen, the grass was twitching as if the wind were blowing, only
there was no wind. But despite the twitching of the grass, there was
no sign of the Cytha. It did not struggle up again. It stayed where it
had fallen.
Duncan got to his feet, dug out the bandanna and mopped at his face.
He heard the soft thud of the step behind him and turned his head. It
was the tracker.
"It's all right, Sipar," he said. "You can quit worrying. I got it. We
can go home now."
  *  *  *  *  *
It had been a long, hard chase, longer than he had thought it might
be. But it had been successful and that was the thing that counted.
For the moment, the _vua_ crop was safe.
He tucked the bandanna back into his pocket, went down the slope and
started up the knoll. He reached the place where the Cytha had fallen.
There were three small gouts of torn, mangled fur and flesh lying on
the ground and there was nothing else.
He spun around and jerked his rifle up. Every nerve was screamingly
alert. He swung his head, searching for the slightest movement, for
some shape or color that was not the shape or color of the bush or
grass or ground. But there was nothing. The heat droned in the hush of
afternoon. There was not a breath of moving air. But there was
danger--a saw-toothed sense of danger close behind his neck.
"Sipar!" he called in a tense whisper, "Watch out!"
The native stood motionless, unheeding, its eyeballs rolling up until
there was only white, while the muscles stood out along its throat
like straining ropes of steel.
Duncan slowly swiveled, rifle held almost at arm's length, elbows
crooked a little, ready to bring the weapon into play in a fraction of
a second.
Nothing stirred. There was no more than emptiness--the emptiness of
sun and molten sky, of grass and scraggy bush, of a brown-and-yellow
land stretching into foreverness.
Step by step, Duncan covered the hillside and finally came back to the
place where the native squatted on its heels and moaned, rocking back
and forth, arms locked tightly across its chest, as if it tried to
cradle itself in a sort of illusory comfort.
The Earthman walked to the place where the Cytha had fallen and picked
up, one by one, the bits of bleeding flesh. They had been mangled by
his bullet. They were limp and had no shape. And it was queer, he
thought. In all his years of hunting, over many planets, he had never
known a bullet to rip out hunks of flesh.
He dropped the bloody pieces back into the grass and wiped his hand
upon his thighs. He got up a little stiffly.
He'd found no trail of blood leading through the grass, and surely an
animal with a hole of that size would leave a trail.
And as he stood there upon the hillside, with the bloody fingerprints
still wet and glistening upon the fabric of his trousers, he felt the
first cold touch of fear, as if the fingertips of fear might
momentarily, almost casually, have trailed across his heart.
  *  *  *  *  *
He turned around and walked back to the native, reached down and shook
it.
"Snap out of it," he ordered.
He expected pleading, cowering, terror, but there was none.
Sipar got swiftly to its feet and stood looking at him and there was,
he thought, an odd glitter in its eyes.
"Get going," Duncan said. "We still have a little time. Start circling
and pick up the trail. I will cover you."
He glanced at the sun. An hour and a half still left--maybe as much as
two. There might still be time to get this buttoned up before the fall
of night.
A half mile beyond the knoll, Sipar picked up the trail again and they
went ahead, but now they traveled more cautiously, for any bush, any
rock, any clump of grass might conceal the wounded beast.
Duncan found himself on edge and cursed himself savagely for it. He'd
been in tight spots before. This was nothing new to him. There was no
reason to get himself tensed up. It was a deadly business, sure, but
he had faced others calmly and walked away from them. It was those
frontier tales he'd heard about the Cytha--the kind of superstitious
chatter that one always heard on the edge of unknown land.
He gripped the rifle tighter and went on.
No animal, he told himself, was unkillable.
Half an hour before sunset, he called a halt when they reached a
brackish waterhole. The light soon would be getting bad for shooting.
In the morning, they'd take up the trail again, and by that time the
Cytha would be at an even greater disadvantage. It would be stiff and
slow and weak. It might be even dead.
Duncan gathered wood and built a fire in the lee of a thorn-bush
thicket. Sipar waded out with the canteens and thrust them at arm's
length beneath the surface to fill them. The water still was warm and
evil-tasting, but it was fairly free of scum and a thirsty man could
drink it.
The sun went down and darkness fell quickly. They dragged more wood
out of the thicket and piled it carefully close at hand.
Duncan reached into his pocket and brought out the little bag of
rockahominy.
"Here," he said to Sipar. "Supper."
The native held one hand cupped and Duncan poured a little mound into
its palm.
"Thank you, mister," Sipar said. "Food-giver."
"Huh?" asked Duncan, then caught what the native meant. "Dive into
it," he said, almost kindly. "It isn't much, but it gives you
strength. We'll need strength tomorrow."
  *  *  *  *  *
Food-giver, eh? Trying to butter him up, perhaps. In a little while,
Sipar would start whining for him to knock off the hunt and head back
for the farm.
Although, come to think of it, he really was the food-giver to this
bunch of sexless wonders. Corn, thank God, grew well on the red and
stubborn soil of Layard--good old corn from North America. Fed to
hogs, made into corn-pone for breakfast back on Earth, and here, on
Layard, the staple food crop for a gang of shiftless varmints who
still regarded, with some good solid skepticism and round-eyed wonder,
this unorthodox idea that one should take the trouble to grow plants
to eat rather than go out and scrounge for them.
Corn from North America, he thought, growing side by side with the
_vua_ of Layard. And that was the way it went. Something from one
planet and something from another and still something further from a
third and so was built up through the wide social confederacy of space
a truly cosmic culture which in the end, in another ten thousand years
or so, might spell out some way of life with more sanity and
understanding than was evident today.
He poured a mound of rockahominy into his own hand and put the bag
back into his pocket.
"Sipar."
"Yes, mister?"
"You were not scared today when the donovan threatened to attack us."
"No, mister. The donovan would not hurt me."
"I see. You said the donovan was taboo to you. Could it be that you,
likewise, are taboo to the donovan?"
"Yes, mister. The donovan and I grew up together."
"Oh, so that's it," said Duncan.
He put a pinch of the parched and powdered corn into his mouth and
took a sip of brackish water. He chewed reflectively on the resultant
mash.
He might go ahead, he knew, and ask why and how and where Sipar and
the donovan had grown up together, but there was no point to it. This
was exactly the kind of tangle that Shotwell was forever getting
into.
Half the time, he told himself, I'm convinced the little stinkers are
doing no more than pulling our legs.
What a fantastic bunch of jerks! Not men, not women, just things. And
while there were never babies, there were children, although never
less than eight or nine years old. And if there were no babies, where
did the eight-and nine-year-olds come from?
  *  *  *  *  *
"I suppose," he said, "that these other things that are your taboos,
the stilt-birds and the screamers and the like, also grew up with
you."
"That is right, mister."
"Some playground that must have been," said Duncan.
He went on chewing, staring out into the darkness beyond the ring of
firelight.
"There's something in the thorn bush, mister."
"I didn't hear a thing."
"Little pattering. Something is running there."
Duncan listened closely. What Sipar said was true. A lot of little
things were running in the thicket.
"More than likely mice," he said.
He finished his rockahominy and took an extra swig of water, gagging
on it slightly.
"Get your rest," he told Sipar. "I'll wake you later so I can catch a
wink or two."
"Mister," Sipar said, "I will stay with you to the end."
"Well," said Duncan, somewhat startled, "that is decent of you."
"I will stay to the death," Sipar promised earnestly.
"Don't strain yourself," said Duncan.
He picked up the rifle and walked down to the waterhole.
The night was quiet and the land continued to have that empty feeling.
Empty except for the fire and the waterhole and the little micelike
animals running in the thicket.
And Sipar--Sipar lying by the fire, curled up and sound asleep
already. Naked, with not a weapon to its hand--just the naked animal,
the basic humanoid, and yet with underlying purpose that at times was
baffling. Scared and shivering this morning at mere mention of the
Cytha, yet never faltering on the trail; in pure funk back there on
the knoll where they had lost the Cytha, but now ready to go on to the
death.
Duncan went back to the fire and prodded Sipar with his toe. The
native came straight up out of sleep.
"Whose death?" asked Duncan. "Whose death were you talking of?"
"Why, ours, of course," said Sipar, and went back to sleep.
III
Duncan did not see the arrow coming. He heard the swishing whistle and
felt the wind of it on the right side of his throat and then it
thunked into a tree behind him.
He leaped aside and dived for the cover of a tumbled mound of boulders
and almost instinctively his thumb pushed the fire control of the
rifle up to automatic.
He crouched behind the jumbled rocks and peered ahead. There was not a
thing to see. The hula-trees shimmered in the blaze of sun and the
thorn-bush was gray and lifeless and the only things astir were three
stilt-birds walking gravely a quarter of a mile away.
"Sipar!" he whispered.
"Here, mister."
"Keep low. It's still out there."
Whatever it might be. Still out there and waiting for another shot.
Duncan shivered, remembering the feel of the arrow flying past his
throat. A hell of a way for a man to die--out at the tail-end of
nowhere with an arrow in his throat and a scared-stiff native heading
back for home as fast as it could go.
He flicked the control on the rifle back to single fire, crawled
around the rock pile and sprinted for a grove of trees that stood on
higher ground. He reached them and there he flanked the spot from
which the arrow must have come.
He unlimbered the binoculars and glassed the area. He still saw no
sign. Whatever had taken the pot shot at them had made its getaway.
He walked back to the tree where the arrow still stood out, its point
driven deep into the bark. He grasped the shaft and wrenched the arrow
free.
"You can come out now," he called to Sipar. "There's no one around."
The arrow was unbelievably crude. The unfeathered shaft looked as if
it had been battered off to the proper length with a jagged stone. The
arrowhead was unflaked flint picked up from some outcropping or dry
creek bed, and it was awkwardly bound to the shaft with the tough but
pliant inner bark of the hula-tree.
"You recognize this?" he asked Sipar.
The native took the arrow and examined it. "Not my tribe."
"Of course not your tribe. Yours wouldn't take a shot at us. Some
other tribe, perhaps?"
"Very poor arrow."
"I know that. But it could kill you just as dead as if it were a good
one. Do you recognize it?"
"No tribe made this arrow," Sipar declared.
"Child, maybe?"
"What would child do way out here?"
[Illustration]
"That's what I thought, too," said Duncan.
  *  *  *  *  *
He took the arrow back, held it between his thumbs and forefingers and
twirled it slowly, with a terrifying thought nibbling at his brain. It
couldn't be. It was too fantastic. He wondered if the sun was finally
getting him that he had thought of it at all.
He squatted down and dug at the ground with the makeshift arrow point.
"Sipar, what do you actually know about the Cytha?"
"Nothing, mister. Scared of it is all."
"We aren't turning back. If there's something that you know--something
that would help us...."
It was as close as he could come to begging aid. It was further than
he had meant to go. He should not have asked at all, he thought
angrily.
"I do not know," the native said.
Duncan cast the arrow to one side and rose to his feet. He cradled the
rifle in his arm. "Let's go."
He watched Sipar trot ahead. Crafty little stinker, he told himself.
It knows more than it's telling.
They toiled into the afternoon. It was, if possible, hotter and drier
than the day before. There was a sense of tension in the air--no, that
was rot. And even if there were, a man must act as if it were not
there. If he let himself fall prey to every mood out in this empty
land, he only had himself to blame for whatever happened to him.
The tracking was harder now. The day before, the Cytha had only run
away, straight-line fleeing to keep ahead of them, to stay out of
their reach. Now it was becoming tricky. It backtracked often in an
attempt to throw them off. Twice in the afternoon, the trail blanked
out entirely and it was only after long searching that Sipar picked it
up again--in one instance, a mile away from where it had vanished in
thin air.
That vanishing bothered Duncan more than he would admit. Trails do not
disappear entirely, not when the terrain remains the same, not when
the weather is unchanged. Something was going on, something, perhaps,
that Sipar knew far more about than it was willing to divulge.
He watched the native closely and there seemed nothing suspicious. It
continued at its work. It was, for all to see, the good and faithful
hound.
  *  *  *  *  *
Late in the afternoon, the plain on which they had been traveling
suddenly dropped away. They stood poised on the brink of a great
escarpment and looked far out to great tangled forests and a flowing
river.
It was like suddenly coming into another and beautiful room that one
had not expected.
This was new land, never seen before by any Earthman. For no one had
ever mentioned that somewhere to the west a forest lay beyond the
bush. Men coming in from space had seen it, probably, but only as a
different color-marking on the planet. To them, it made no difference.
But to the men who lived on Layard, to the planter and the trader, the
prospector and the hunter, it was important. And I, thought Duncan
with a sense of triumph, am the man who found it.
"Mister!"
"Now what?"
"Out there. _Skun!_"
"I don't--"
"Out there, mister. Across the river."
Duncan saw it then--a haze in the blueness of the rift--a puff of
copper moving very fast, and as he watched, he heard the far-off
keening of the storm, a shiver in the air rather than a sound.
He watched in fascination as it moved along the river and saw the
boiling fury it made out of the forest. It struck and crossed the
river, and the river for a moment seemed to stand on end, with a sheet
of silvery water splashed toward the sky.
Then it was gone as quickly as it had happened, but there was a
tumbled slash across the forest where the churning winds had traveled.
Back at the farm, Zikkara had warned him of the _skun_. This was the
season for them, it had said, and a man caught in one wouldn't have a
chance.
Duncan let his breath out slowly.
"Bad," said Sipar.
"Yes, very bad."
"Hit fast. No warning."
"What about the trail?" asked Duncan. "Did the Cytha--"
Sipar nodded downward.
"Can we make it before nightfall?"
"I think so," Sipar answered.
It was rougher than they had thought. Twice they went down blind
trails that pinched off, with sheer rock faces opening out into drops
of hundreds of feet, and were forced to climb again and find another
way.
They reached the bottom of the escarpment as the brief twilight closed
in and they hurried to gather firewood. There was no water, but a
little was still left in their canteens and they made do with that.
  *  *  *  *  *
After their scant meal of rockahominy, Sipar rolled himself into a
ball and went to sleep immediately.
Duncan sat with his back against a boulder which one day, long ago,
had fallen from the slope above them, but was now half buried in the
soil that through the ages had kept sifting down.
Two days gone, he told himself.
Was there, after all, some truth in the whispered tales that made the
rounds back at the settlements--that no one should waste his time in
tracking down a Cytha, since a Cytha was unkillable?
Nonsense, he told himself. And yet the hunt had toughened, the trail
become more difficult, the Cytha a much more cunning and elusive
quarry. Where it had run from them the day before, now it fought to
shake them off. And if it did that the second day, why had it not
tried to throw them off the first? And what about the third
day--tomorrow?
He shook his head. It seemed incredible that an animal would become
more formidable as the hunt progressed. But that seemed to be exactly
what had happened. More spooked, perhaps, more frightened--only the
Cytha did not act like a frightened beast. It was acting like an
animal that was gaining savvy and determination, and that was somehow
frightening.
From far off to the west, toward the forest and the river, came the
laughter and the howling of a pack of screamers. Duncan leaned his
rifle against the boulder and got up to pile more wood on the fire. He
stared out into the western darkness, listening to the racket. He made
a wry face and pushed a hand absent-mindedly through his hair. He put
out a silent hope that the screamers would decide to keep their
distance. They were something a man could do without.
Behind him, a pebble came bumping down the slope. It thudded to a rest
just short of the fire.
Duncan spun around. Foolish thing to do, he thought, to camp so near
the slope. If something big should start to move, they'd be out of
luck.
He stood and listened. The night was quiet. Even the screamers had
shut up for the moment. Just one rolling rock and he had his hackles
up. He'd have to get himself in hand.
He went back to the boulder, and as he stooped to pick up the rifle,
he heard the faint beginning of a rumble. He straightened swiftly to
face the scarp that blotted out the star-strewn sky--and the rumble
grew!
  *  *  *  *  *
In one leap, he was at Sipar's side. He reached down and grasped the
native by an arm, jerked it erect, held it on its feet. Sipar's eyes
snapped open, blinking in the firelight.
The rumble had grown to a roar and there were thumping noises, as of
heavy boulders bouncing, and beneath the roar the silky, ominous
rustle of sliding soil and rock.
Sipar jerked its arm free of Duncan's grip and plunged into the
darkness. Duncan whirled and followed.
They ran, stumbling in the dark, and behind them the roar of the
sliding, bouncing rock became a throaty roll of thunder that filled
the night from brim to brim. As he ran, Duncan could feel, in dread
anticipation, the gusty breath of hurtling debris blowing on his neck,
the crushing impact of a boulder smashing into him, the engulfing
flood of tumbling talus snatching at his legs.
A puff of billowing dust came out and caught them and they ran choking
as well as stumbling. Off to the left of them, a mighty chunk of rock
chugged along the ground in jerky, almost reluctant fashion.
Then the thunder stopped and all one could hear was the small
slitherings of the lesser debris as it trickled down the slope.
Duncan stopped running and slowly turned around. The campfire was
gone, buried, no doubt, beneath tons of overlay, and the stars had
paled because of the great cloud of dust which still billowed up into
the sky.
He heard Sipar moving near him and reached out a hand, searching for
the tracker, not knowing exactly where it was. He found the native,
grasped it by the shoulder and pulled it up beside him.
Sipar was shivering.
"It's all right," said Duncan.
And it _was_ all right, he reassured himself. He still had the rifle.
The extra drum of ammunition and the knife were on his belt, the bag
of rockahominy in his pocket. The canteens were all they had lost--the
canteens and the fire.
"We'll have to hole up somewhere for the night," Duncan said. "There
are screamers on the loose."
  *  *  *  *  *
He didn't like what he was thinking, nor the sharp edge of fear that
was beginning to crowd in upon him. He tried to shrug it off, but it
still stayed with him, just out of reach.
Sipar plucked at his elbow.
"Thorn thicket, mister. Over there. We could crawl inside. We would be
safe from screamers."
It was torture, but they made it.
"Screamers and you are taboo," said Duncan, suddenly remembering. "How
come you are afraid of them?"
"Afraid for you, mister, mostly. Afraid for myself just a little.
Screamers could forget. They might not recognize me until too late.
Safer here."
"I agree with you," said Duncan.
The screamers came and padded all about the thicket. The beasts
sniffed and clawed at the thorns to reach them, but finally went away.
When morning came, Duncan and Sipar climbed the scarp, clambering over
the boulders and the tons of soil and rock that covered their camping
place. Following the gash cut by the slide, they clambered up the
slope and finally reached the point of the slide's beginning.
There they found the depression in which the poised slab of rock had
rested and where the supporting soil had been dug away so that it
could be started, with a push, down the slope above the campfire.
And all about were the deeply sunken pug marks of the Cytha!
IV
Now it was more than just a hunt. It was knife against the throat,
kill or be killed. Now there was no stopping, when before there might
have been. It was no longer sport and there was no mercy.
"And that's the way I like it," Duncan told himself.
He rubbed his hand along the rifle barrel and saw the metallic glints
shine in the noonday sun. One more shot, he prayed. Just give me one
more shot at it. This time there will be no slip-up. This time there
will be more than three sodden hunks of flesh and fur lying in the
grass to mock me.
He squinted his eyes against the heat shimmer rising from the river,
watching Sipar hunkered beside the water's edge.
The native rose to its feet and trotted back to him.
"It crossed," said Sipar. "It walked out as far as it could go and it
must have swum."
"Are you sure? It might have waded out to make us think it crossed,
then doubled back again."
He stared at the purple-green of the trees across the river. Inside
that forest, it would be hellish going.
"We can look," said Sipar.
"Good. You go downstream. I'll go up."
An hour later, they were back. They had found no tracks. There seemed
little doubt the Cytha had really crossed the river.
They stood side by side, looking at the forest.
"Mister, we have come far. You are brave to hunt the Cytha. You have
no fear of death."
"The fear of death," Duncan said, "is entirely infantile. And it's
beside the point as well. I do not intend to die."
They waded out into the stream. The bottom shelved gradually and they
had to swim no more than a hundred yards or so.
They reached the forest bank and threw themselves flat to rest.
Duncan looked back the way that they had come. To the east, the
escarpment was a dark-blue smudge against the pale-blue burnished sky.
And two days back of that lay the farm and the _vua_ field, but they
seemed much farther off than that. They were lost in time and
distance; they belonged to another existence and another world.
All his life, it seemed to him, had faded and become inconsequential
and forgotten, as if this moment in his life were the only one that
counted; as if all the minutes and the hours, all the breaths and
heartbeats, wake and sleep, had pointed toward this certain hour upon
this certain stream, with the rifle molded to his hand and the cool,
calculated bloodlust of a killer riding in his brain.
  *  *  *  *  *
Sipar finally got up and began to range along the stream. Duncan sat
up and watched.
Scared to death, he thought, and yet it stayed with me. At the
campfire that first night, it had said it would stick to the death and
apparently it had meant exactly what it said. It's hard, he thought,
to figure out these jokers, hard to know what kind of mental
operation, what seethings of emotion, what brand of ethics and what
variety of belief and faith go to make them and their way of life.
It would have been so easy for Sipar to have missed the trail and
swear it could not find it. Even from the start, it could have refused
to go. Yet, fearing, it had gone. Reluctant, it had trailed. Without
any need for faithfulness and loyalty, it had been loyal and faithful.
But loyal to what, Duncan wondered, to him, the outlander and
intruder? Loyal to itself? Or perhaps, although that seemed
impossible, faithful to the Cytha?
What does Sipar think of me, he asked himself, and maybe more to the
point, what do I think of Sipar? Is there a common meeting ground? Or
are we, despite our humanoid forms, condemned forever to be alien and
apart?
He held the rifle across his knees and stroked it, polishing it,
petting it, making it even more closely a part of him, an instrument
of his deadliness, an expression of his determination to track and
kill the Cytha.
Just another chance, he begged. Just one second, or even less, to draw
a steady bead. That is all I want, all I need, all I'll ask.
Then he could go back across the days that he had left behind him,
back to the farm and field, back into that misty other life from which
he had been so mysteriously divorced, but which in time undoubtedly
would become real and meaningful again.
Sipar came back. "I found the trail."
Duncan heaved himself to his feet. "Good."
They left the river and plunged into the forest and there the heat
closed in more mercilessly than ever--humid, stifling heat that felt
like a soggy blanket wrapped tightly round the body.
The trail lay plain and clear. The Cytha now, it seemed, was intent
upon piling up a lead without recourse to evasive tactics. Perhaps it
had reasoned that its pursuers would lose some time at the river and
it may have been trying to stretch out that margin even further.
Perhaps it needed that extra time, he speculated, to set up the
necessary machinery for another dirty trick.
Sipar stopped and waited for Duncan to catch up. "Your knife, mister?"
Duncan hesitated. "What for?"
"I have a thorn in my foot," the native said. "I have to get it out."
Duncan pulled the knife from his belt and tossed it. Sipar caught it
deftly.
Looking straight at Duncan, with the flicker of a smile upon its lips,
the native cut its throat.
V
He should go back, he knew. Without the tracker, he didn't have a
chance. The odds were now with the Cytha--if, indeed, they had not
been with it from the very start.
Unkillable? Unkillable because it grew in intelligence to meet
emergencies? Unkillable because, pressed, it could fashion a bow and
arrow, however crude? Unkillable because it had a sense of tactics,
like rolling rocks at night upon its enemy? Unkillable because a
native tracker would cheerfully kill itself to protect the Cytha?
A sort of crisis-beast, perhaps? One able to develop intelligence and
abilities to meet each new situation and then lapsing back to the
level of non-intelligent contentment? That, thought Duncan, would be a
sensible way for anything to live. It would do away with the
inconvenience and the irritability and the discontentment of
intelligence when intelligence was unneeded. But the intelligence, and
the abilities which went with it, would be there, safely tucked away
where one could reach in and get them, like a necklace or a
gun--something to be used or to be put away as the case might be.
Duncan hunched forward and with a stick of wood pushed the fire
together. The flames blazed up anew and sent sparks flying up into the
whispering darkness of the trees. The night had cooled off a little,
but the humidity still hung on and a man felt uncomfortable--a little
frightened, too.
Duncan lifted his head and stared up into the fire-flecked darkness.
There were no stars because the heavy foliage shut them out. He missed
the stars. He'd feel better if he could look up and see them.
When morning came, he should go back. He should quit this hunt which
now had become impossible and even slightly foolish.
But he knew he wouldn't. Somewhere along the three-day trail, he had
become committed to a purpose and a challenge, and he knew that when
morning came, he would go on again. It was not hatred that drove him,
nor vengeance, nor even the trophy-urge--the hunter-lust that prodded
men to kill something strange or harder to kill or bigger than any man
had ever killed before. It was something more than that, some weird
entangling of the Cytha's meaning with his own.
He reached out and picked up the rifle and laid it in his lap. Its
barrel gleamed dully in the flickering campfire light and he rubbed
his hand along the stock as another man might stroke a woman's throat.
"Mister," said a voice.
  *  *  *  *  *
It did not startle him, for the word was softly spoken and for a
moment he had forgotten that Sipar was dead--dead with a half-smile
fixed upon its face and with its throat laid wide open.
"Mister?"
Duncan stiffened.
Sipar was dead and there was no one else--and yet someone had spoken
to him, and there could be only one thing in all this wilderness that
might speak to him.
"Yes," he said.
He did not move. He simply sat there, with the rifle in his lap.
"You know who I am?"
"I suppose you are the Cytha."
"You have done well," the Cytha said. "You've made a splendid hunt.
There is no dishonor if you should decide to quit. Why don't you go
back? I promise you no harm."
It was over there, somewhere in front of him, somewhere in the brush
beyond the fire, almost straight across the fire from him, Duncan told
himself. If he could keep it talking, perhaps even lure it out--
"Why should I?" he asked. "The hunt is never done until one gets the
thing one is after."
"I can kill you," the Cytha told him. "But I do not want to kill. It
hurts to kill."
"That's right," said Duncan. "You are most perceptive."
For he had it pegged now. He knew exactly where it was. He could
afford a little mockery.
His thumb slid up the metal and nudged the fire control to automatic
and he flexed his legs beneath him so that he could rise and fire in
one single motion.
"Why did you hunt me?" the Cytha asked. "You are a stranger on my
world and you had no right to hunt me. Not that I mind, of course. In
fact, I found it stimulating. We must do it again. When I am ready to
be hunted, I shall come and tell you and we can spend a day or two at
it."
"Sure we can," said Duncan, rising. And as he rose into his crouch, he
held the trigger down and the gun danced in insane fury, the muzzle
flare a flicking tongue of hatred and the hail of death hissing
spitefully in the underbrush.
"Anytime you want to," yelled Duncan gleefully, "I'll come and hunt
you! You just say the word and I'll be on your tail. I might even kill
you. How do you like it, chump!"
And he held the trigger tight and kept his crouch so the slugs would
not fly high, but would cut their swath just above the ground, and he
moved the muzzle back and forth a lot so that he covered extra ground
to compensate for any miscalculations he might have made.
  *  *  *  *  *
The magazine ran out and the gun clicked empty and the vicious chatter
stopped. Powder smoke drifted softly in the campfire light and the
smell of it was perfume in the nostrils and in the underbrush many
little feet were running, as if a thousand frightened mice were
scurrying from catastrophe.
Duncan unhooked the extra magazine from where it hung upon his belt
and replaced the empty one. Then he snatched a burning length of wood
from the fire and waved it frantically until it burst into a blaze and
became a torch. Rifle grasped in one hand and the torch in the other,
he plunged into the underbrush. Little chittering things fled to
escape him.
He did not find the Cytha. He found chewed-up bushes and soil churned
by flying metal, and he found five lumps of flesh and fur, and these
he brought back to the fire.
Now the fear that had been stalking him, keeping just beyond his
reach, walked out from the shadows and hunkered by the campfire with
him.
He placed the rifle within easy reach and arranged the five bloody
chunks on the ground close to the fire and he tried with trembling
fingers to restore them to the shape they'd been before the bullets
struck them. And that was a good one, he thought with grim irony,
because they had no shape. They had been part of the Cytha and you
killed a Cytha inch by inch, not with a single shot. You knocked a
pound of meat off it the first time, and the next time you shot off
another pound or two, and if you got enough shots at it, you finally
carved it down to size and maybe you could kill it then, although he
wasn't sure.
He was afraid. He admitted that he was and he squatted there and
watched his fingers shake and he kept his jaws clamped tight to stop
the chatter of his teeth.
The fear had been getting closer all the time; he knew it had moved in
by a step or two when Sipar cut its throat, and why in the name of God
had the damn fool done it? It made no sense at all. He had wondered
about Sipar's loyalties, and the very loyalties that he had dismissed
as a sheer impossibility had been the answer, after all. In the end,
for some obscure reason--obscure to humans, that is--Sipar's loyalty
had been to the Cytha.
But then what was the use of searching for any reason in it? Nothing
that had happened made any sense. It made no sense that a beast one
was pursuing should up and talk to one--although it did fit in with
the theory of the crisis-beast he had fashioned in his mind.
  *  *  *  *  *
Progressive adaptation, he told himself. Carry adaptation far enough
and you'd reach communication. But might not the Cytha's power of
adaptation be running down? Had the Cytha gone about as far as it
could force itself to go? Maybe so, he thought. It might be worth a
gamble. Sipar's suicide, for all its casualness, bore the overtones of
last-notch desperation. And the Cytha's speaking to Duncan, its
attempt to parley with him, contained a note of weakness.
The arrow had failed and the rockslide had failed and so had Sipar's
death. What next would the Cytha try? Had it anything to try?
Tomorrow he'd find out. Tomorrow he'd go on. He couldn't turn back
now.
He was too deeply involved. He'd always wonder, if he turned back now,
whether another hour or two might not have seen the end of it. There
were too many questions, too much mystery--there was now far more at
stake than ten rows of _vua_.
Another day might make some sense of it, might banish the dread walker
that trod upon his heels, might bring some peace of mind.
As it stood right at the moment, none of it made sense.
But even as he thought it, suddenly one of the bits of bloody flesh
and mangled fur made sense.
Beneath the punching and prodding of his fingers, it had assumed a
shape.
Breathlessly, Duncan bent above it, not believing, not even wanting to
believe, hoping frantically that it should prove completely wrong.
But there was nothing wrong with it. The shape was there and could not
be denied. It had somehow fitted back into its natural shape and it
was a baby screamer--well, maybe not a baby, but at least a tiny
screamer.
Duncan sat back on his heels and sweated. He wiped his bloody hands
upon the ground. He wondered what other shapes he'd find if he put
back into proper place the other hunks of limpness that lay beside the
fire.
He tried and failed. They were too smashed and torn.
He picked them up and tossed them in the fire. He took up his rifle
and walked around the fire, sat down with his back against a tree,
cradling the gun across his knees.
  *  *  *  *  *
Those little scurrying feet, he wondered--like the scampering of a
thousand busy mice. He had heard them twice, that first night in the
thicket by the waterhole and again tonight.
And what could the Cytha be? Certainly not the simple, uncomplicated,
marauding animal he had thought to start with.
A hive-beast? A host animal? A thing masquerading in many different
forms?
Shotwell, trained in such deductions, might make a fairly accurate
guess, but Shotwell was not here. He was at the farm, fretting, more
than likely, over Duncan's failure to return.
Finally the first light of morning began to filter through the forest
and it was not the glaring, clean white light of the open plain and
bush, but a softened, diluted, fuzzy green light to match the
smothering vegetation.
The night noises died away and the noises of the day took up--the
sawings of unseen insects, the screechings of hidden birds and
something far away began to make a noise that sounded like an empty
barrel falling slowly down a stairway.
What little coolness the night had brought dissipated swiftly and the
heat clamped down, a breathless, relentless heat that quivered in the
air.
Circling, Duncan picked up the Cytha trail not more than a hundred
yards from camp.
The beast had been traveling fast. The pug marks were deeply sunk and
widely spaced. Duncan followed as rapidly as he dared. It was a
temptation to follow at a run, to match the Cytha's speed, for the
trail was plain and fresh and it fairly beckoned.
And that was wrong, Duncan told himself. It was too fresh, too
plain--almost as if the animal had gone to endless trouble so that the
human could not miss the trail.
He stopped his trailing and crouched beside a tree and studied the
tracks ahead. His hands were too tense upon the gun, his body keyed
too high and fine. He forced himself to take slow, deep breaths. He
had to calm himself. He had to loosen up.
He studied the tracks ahead--four bunched pug marks, then a long leap
interval, then four more bunched tracks, and between the sets of marks
the forest floor was innocent and smooth.
Too smooth, perhaps. Especially the third one from him. Too smooth and
somehow artificial, as if someone had patted it with gentle hands to
make it unsuspicious.
Duncan sucked his breath in slowly.
Trap?
Or was his imagination playing tricks on him?
And if it were a trap, he would have fallen into it if he had kept on
following as he had started out.
Now there was something else, a strange uneasiness, and he stirred
uncomfortably, casting frantically for some clue to what it was.
  *  *  *  *  *
He rose and stepped out from the tree, with the gun at ready. What a
perfect place to set a trap, he thought. One would be looking at the
pug marks, never at the space between them, for the space between
would be neutral ground, safe to stride out upon.
Oh, clever Cytha, he said to himself. Oh, clever, clever Cytha!
And now he knew what the other trouble was--the great uneasiness. It
was the sense of being watched.
Somewhere up ahead, the Cytha was crouched, watching and
waiting--anxious or exultant, maybe even with laughter rumbling in its
throat.
He walked slowly forward until he reached the third set of tracks and
he saw that he had been right. The little area ahead was smoother than
it should be.
"Cytha!" he called.
His voice was far louder than he had meant it to be and he stood
astonished and a bit abashed.
Then he realized why it was so loud.
It was the only sound there was!
The forest suddenly had fallen silent. The insects and birds were
quiet and the thing in the distance had quit falling down the stairs.
Even the leaves were silent. There was no rustle in them and they hung
limp upon their stems.
There was a feeling of doom and the green light had changed to a
copper light and everything was still.
And the light was _copper_!
Duncan spun around in panic. There was no place for him to hide.
Before he could take another step, the _skun_ came and the winds
rushed out of nowhere. The air was clogged with flying leaves and
debris. Trees snapped and popped and tumbled in the air.
The wind hurled Duncan to his knees, and as he fought to regain his
feet, he remembered, in a blinding flash of total recall, how it had
looked from atop the escarpment--the boiling fury of the winds and the
mad swirling of the coppery mist and how the trees had whipped in
whirlpool fashion.
He came half erect and stumbled, clawing at the ground in an attempt
to get up again, while inside his brain an insistent, clicking voice
cried out for him to run, and somewhere another voice said to lie flat
upon the ground, to dig in as best he could.
Something struck him from behind and he went down, pinned flat, with
his rifle wedged beneath him. He cracked his head upon the ground and
the world whirled sickeningly and plastered his face with a handful of
mud and tattered leaves.
He tried to crawl and couldn't, for something had grabbed him by the
ankle and was hanging on.
  *  *  *  *  *
With a frantic hand, he clawed the mess out of his eyes, spat it from
his mouth.
Across the spinning ground, something black and angular tumbled
rapidly. It was coming straight toward him and he saw it was the Cytha
and that in another second it would be on top of him.
He threw up an arm across his face, with the elbow crooked, to take
the impact of the wind-blown Cytha and to ward it off.
But it never reached him. Less than a yard away, the ground opened up
to take the Cytha and it was no longer there.
Suddenly the wind cut off and the leaves once more hung motionless and
the heat clamped down again and that was the end of it. The _skun_ had
come and struck and gone.
Minutes, Duncan wondered, or perhaps no more than seconds. But in
those seconds, the forest had been flattened and the trees lay in
shattered heaps.
He raised himself on an elbow and looked to see what was the matter
with his foot and he saw that a fallen tree had trapped his foot
beneath it.
He tugged a few times experimentally. It was no use. Two close-set
limbs, branching almost at right angles from the hole, had been driven
deep into the ground and his foot, he saw, had been caught at the
ankle in the fork of the buried branches.
The foot didn't hurt--not yet. It didn't seem to be there at all. He
tried wiggling his toes and felt none.
He wiped the sweat off his face with a shirt sleeve and fought to
force down the panic that was rising in him. Getting panicky was the
worst thing a man could do in a spot like this. The thing to do was to
take stock of the situation, figure out the best approach, then go
ahead and try it.
The tree looked heavy, but perhaps he could handle it if he had to,
although there was the danger that if he shifted it, the bole might
settle more solidly and crush his foot beneath it. At the moment, the
two heavy branches, thrust into the ground on either side of his
ankle, were holding most of the tree's weight off his foot.
The best thing to do, he decided, was to dig the ground away beneath
his foot until he could pull it out.
He twisted around and started digging with the fingers of one hand.
Beneath the thin covering of humus, he struck a solid surface and his
fingers slid along it.
With mounting alarm, he explored the ground, scratching at the humus.
There was nothing but rock--some long-buried boulder, the top of which
lay just beneath the ground.
His foot was trapped beneath a heavy tree and a massive boulder, held
securely in place by forked branches that had forced their splintering
way down along the boulder's sides.
  *  *  *  *  *
He lay back, propped on an elbow. It was evident that he could do
nothing about the buried boulder. If he was going to do anything, his
problem was the tree.
To move the tree, he would need a lever and he had a good, stout lever
in his rifle. It would be a shame, he thought a little wryly, to use a
gun for such a purpose, but he had no choice.
He worked for an hour and it was no good. Even with the rifle as a
pry, he could not budge the tree.
He lay back, defeated, breathing hard, wringing wet with perspiration.
He grimaced at the sky.
All right, Cytha, he thought, you won out in the end. But it took a
_skun_ to do it. With all your tricks, you couldn't do the job
until....
Then he remembered.
He sat up hurriedly.
"Cytha!" he called.
The Cytha had fallen into a hole that had opened in the ground. The
hole was less than an arm's length away from him, with a little debris
around its edges still trickling into it.
Duncan stretched out his body, lying flat upon the ground, and looked
into the hole. There, at the bottom of it, was the Cytha.
It was the first time he'd gotten a good look at the Cytha and it was
a crazily put-together thing. It seemed to have nothing functional
about it and it looked more like a heap of something, just thrown on
the ground, than it did an animal.
The hole, he saw, was more than an ordinary hole. It was a pit and
very cleverly constructed. The mouth was about four feet in diameter
and it widened to roughly twice that at the bottom. It was, in
general, bottle-shaped, with an incurving shoulder at the top so that
anything that fell in could not climb out. Anything falling into that
pit was in to stay.
This, Duncan knew, was what had lain beneath that too-smooth interval
between the two sets of Cytha tracks. The Cytha had worked all night
to dig it, then had carried away the dirt dug out of the pit and had
built a flimsy camouflage cover over it. Then it had gone back and
made the trail that was so loud and clear, so easy to make out and
follow. And having done all that, having labored hard and stealthily,
the Cytha had settled down to watch, to make sure the following human
had fallen in the pit.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Hi, pal," said Duncan. "How are you making out?"
The Cytha did not answer.
"Classy pit," said Duncan. "Do you always den up in luxury like this?"
[Illustration]
But the Cytha didn't answer.
[Illustration]
Something queer was happening to the Cytha. It was coming all apart.
Duncan watched with fascinated horror as the Cytha broke down into a
thousand lumps of motion that scurried in the pit and tried to
scramble up its sides, only to fall back in tiny showers of sand.
Amid the scurrying lumps, one thing remained intact, a fragile object
that resembled nothing quite so much as the stripped skeleton of a
Thanksgiving turkey. But it was a most extraordinary Thanksgiving
skeleton, for it throbbed with pulsing life and glowed with a steady
violet light.
Chitterings and squeakings came out of the pit and the soft patter of
tiny running feet, and as Duncan's eyes became accustomed to the
darkness of the pit, he began to make out the forms of some of the
scurrying shapes. There were tiny screamers and some donovans and
sawmill birds and a bevy of kill-devils and something else as well.
Duncan raised a hand and pressed it against his eyes, then took it
quickly away. The little faces still were there, looking up as if
beseeching him, with the white shine of their teeth and the white
rolling of their eyes.
He felt horror wrenching at his stomach and the sour, bitter taste of
revulsion welled into his throat, but he fought it down, harking back
to that day at the farm before they had started on the hunt.
"I can track down anything but screamers, stilt-birds, longhorns and
donovans," Sipar had told him solemnly. "These are my taboos."
And Sipar was also their taboo, for he had not feared the donovan.
Sipar had been, however, somewhat fearful of the screamers in the dead
of night because, the native had told him reasonably, screamers were
forgetful.
Forgetful of what!
Forgetful of the Cytha-mother? Forgetful of the motley brood in which
they had spent their childhood?
For that was the only answer to what was running in the pit and the
whole, unsuspected answer to the enigma against which men like
Shotwell had frustratedly banged their heads for years.
  *  *  *  *  *
Strange, he told himself. All right, it might be strange, but if it
worked, what difference did it make? So the planet's denizens were
sexless because there was no need of sex--what was wrong with that? It
might, in fact, Duncan admitted to himself, head off a lot of trouble.
No family spats, no triangle trouble, no fighting over mates. While it
might be unexciting, it did seem downright peaceful.
And since there was no sex, the Cytha species was the planetary
mother--but more than just a mother. The Cytha, more than likely, was
mother-father, incubator, nursery, teacher and perhaps many other
things besides, all rolled into one.
In many ways, he thought, it might make a lot of sense. Here natural
selection would be ruled out and ecology could be controlled in
considerable degree and mutation might even be a matter of deliberate
choice rather than random happenstance.
And it would make for a potential planetary unity such as no other
world had ever known. Everything here was kin to everything else. Here
was a planet where Man, or any other alien, must learn to tread most
softly. For it was not inconceivable that, in a crisis or a clash of
interests, one might find himself faced suddenly with a unified and
cooperating planet, with every form of life making common cause
against the interloper.
The little scurrying things had given up; they'd gone back to their
places, clustered around the pulsing violet of the Thanksgiving
skeleton, each one fitting into place until the Cytha had taken shape
again. As if, Duncan told himself, blood and nerve and muscle had come
back from a brief vacation to form the beast anew.
"Mister," asked the Cytha, "what do we do now?"
"You should know," Duncan told it. "You were the one who dug the pit."
"I split myself," the Cytha said. "A part of me dug the pit and the
other part that stayed on the surface got me out when the job was
done."
"Convenient," grunted Duncan.
And it _was_ convenient. That was what had happened to the Cytha when
he had shot at it--it had split into all its component parts and had
got away. And that night beside the waterhole, it had spied on him,
again in the form of all its separate parts, from the safety of the
thicket.
"You are caught and so am I," the Cytha said. "Both of us will die
here. It seems a fitting end to our association. Do you not agree with
me?"
"I'll get you out," said Duncan wearily. "I have no quarrel with
children."
  *  *  *  *  *
He dragged the rifle toward him and unhooked the sling from the stock.
Carefully he lowered the gun by the sling, still attached to the
barrel, down into the pit.
The Cytha reared up and grasped it with its forepaws.
"Easy now," Duncan cautioned. "You're heavy. I don't know if I can
hold you."
But he needn't have worried. The little ones were detaching themselves
and scrambling up the rifle and the sling. They reached his extended
arms and ran up them with scrabbling claws. Little sneering screamers
and the comic stilt-birds and the mouse-size kill-devils that snarled
at him as they climbed. And the little grinning natives--not babies,
scarcely children, but small editions of full-grown humanoids. And the
weird donovans scampering happily.
They came climbing up his arms and across his shoulders and milled
about on the ground beside him, waiting for the others.
And finally the Cytha, not skinned down to the bare bones of its
Thanksgiving-turkey-size, but far smaller than it had been, climbed
awkwardly up the rifle and the sling to safety.
Duncan hauled the rifle up and twisted himself into a sitting
position.
The Cytha, he saw, was reassembling.
He watched in fascination as the restless miniatures of the planet's
life swarmed and seethed like a hive of bees, each one clicking into
place to form the entire beast.
And now the Cytha was complete. Yet small--still small--no more than
lion-size.
"But it is such a little one," Zikkara had argued with him that
morning at the farm. "It is such a young one."
Just a young brood, no more than suckling infants--if suckling was the
word, or even some kind of wild approximation. And through the months
and years, the Cytha would grow, with the growing of its diverse
children, until it became a monstrous thing.
It stood there looking at Duncan and the tree.
"Now," said Duncan, "if you'll push on the tree, I think that between
the two of us--"
"It is too bad," the Cytha said, and wheeled itself about.
He watched it go loping off.
"Hey!" he yelled.
But it didn't stop.
He grabbed up the rifle and had it halfway to his shoulder before he
remembered how absolutely futile it was to shoot at the Cytha.
He let the rifle down.
"The dirty, ungrateful, double-crossing--"
He stopped himself. There was no profit in rage. When you were in a
jam, you did the best you could. You figured out the problem and you
picked the course that seemed best and you didn't panic at the odds.
He laid the rifle in his lap and started to hook up the sling and it
was not till then that he saw the barrel was packed with sand and
dirt.
He sat numbly for a moment, thinking back to how close he had been to
firing at the Cytha, and if that barrel was packed hard enough or deep
enough, he might have had an exploding weapon in his hands.
He had used the rifle as a crowbar, which was no way to use a gun.
That was one way, he told himself, that was guaranteed to ruin it.
  *  *  *  *  *
Duncan hunted around and found a twig and dug at the clogged muzzle,
but the dirt was jammed too firmly in it and he made little progress.
He dropped the twig and was hunting for another stronger one when he
caught the motion in a nearby clump of brush.
He watched closely for a moment and there was nothing, so he resumed
the hunt for a stronger twig. He found one and started poking at the
muzzle and there was another flash of motion.
He twisted around. Not more than twenty feet away, a screamer sat
easily on its haunches. Its tongue was lolling out and it had what
looked like a grin upon its face.
And there was another, just at the edge of the clump of brush where he
had caught the motion first.
There were others as well, he knew. He could hear them sliding through
the tangle of fallen trees, could sense the soft padding of their
feet.
The executioners, he thought.
The Cytha certainly had not wasted any time.
He raised the rifle and rapped the barrel smartly on the fallen tree,
trying to dislodge the obstruction in the bore. But it didn't budge;
the barrel still was packed with sand.
But no matter--he'd have to fire anyhow and take whatever chance there
was.
He shoved the control to automatic, and tilted up the muzzle.
There were six of them now, sitting in a ragged row, grinning at him,
not in any hurry. They were sure of him and there was no hurry. He'd
still be there when they decided to move in.
And there were others--on all sides of him.
Once it started, he wouldn't have a chance.
"It'll be expensive, gents," he told them.
And he was astonished at how calm, how coldly objective he could be,
now that the chips were down. But that was the way it was, he
realized.
He'd thought, a while ago, how a man might suddenly find himself face
to face with an aroused and cooperating planet. Maybe this was it in
miniature.
The Cytha had obviously passed the word along: _Man back there needs
killing. Go and get him._
Just like that, for a Cytha would be the power here. A life force, the
giver of life, the decider of life, the repository of all animal life
on the entire planet.
There was more than one of them, of course. Probably they had home
districts, spheres of influence and responsibility mapped out. And
each one would be a power supreme in its own district.
Momism, he thought with a sour grin. Momism at its absolute peak.
Nevertheless, he told himself, it wasn't too bad a system if you
wanted to consider it objectively.
But he was in a poor position to be objective about that or anything
else.
  *  *  *  *  *
The screamers were inching closer, hitching themselves forward slowly
on their bottoms.
"I'm going to set up a deadline for you critters," Duncan called out.
"Just two feet farther, up to that rock, and I let you have it."
He'd get all six of them, of course, but the shots would be the signal
for the general rush by all those other animals slinking in the brush.
If he were free, if he were on his feet, possibly he could beat them
off. But pinned as he was, he didn't have a chance. It would be all
over less than a minute after he opened fire. He might, he figured,
last as long as that.
The six inched closer and he raised the rifle.
But they stopped and moved no farther. Their ears lifted just a
little, as if they might be listening, and the grins dropped from
their faces. They squirmed uneasily and assumed a look of guilt and,
like shadows, they were gone, melting away so swiftly that he scarcely
saw them go.
Duncan sat quietly, listening, but he could hear no sound.
Reprieve, he thought. But for how long? Something had scared them off,
but in a while they might be back. He had to get out of here and he
had to make it fast.
If he could find a longer lever, he could move the tree. There was a
branch slanting up from the topside of the fallen tree. It was almost
four inches at the butt and it carried its diameter well.
He slid the knife from his belt and looked at it. Too small, too thin,
he thought, to chisel through a four-inch branch, but it was all he
had. When a man was desperate enough, though, when his very life
depended on it, he would do anything.
He hitched himself along, sliding toward the point where the branch
protruded from the tree. His pinned leg protested with stabs of pain
as his body wrenched it around. He gritted his teeth and pushed
himself closer. Pain slashed through his leg again and he was still
long inches from the branch.
He tried once more, then gave up. He lay panting on the ground.
There was just one thing left.
He'd have to try to hack out a notch in the trunk just above his leg.
No, that would be next to impossible, for he'd be cutting into the
whorled and twisted grain at the base of the supporting fork.
Either that or cut off his foot, and that was even more impossible. A
man would faint before he got the job done.
It was useless, he knew. He could do neither one. There was nothing he
could do.
  *  *  *  *  *
For the first time, he admitted to himself: He would stay here and
die. Shotwell, back at the farm, in a day or two might set out hunting
for him. But Shotwell would never find him. And anyhow, by nightfall,
if not sooner, the screamers would be back.
He laughed gruffly in his throat--laughing at himself.
The Cytha had won the hunt hands down. It had used a human weakness to
win and then had used that same human weakness to achieve a viciously
poetic vengeance.
After all, what could one expect? One could not equate human ethics
with the ethics of the Cytha. Might not human ethics, in certain
cases, seem as weird and illogical, as infamous and ungrateful, to an
alien?
He hunted for a twig and began working again to clean the rifle bore.
A crashing behind him twisted him around and he saw the Cytha. Behind
the Cytha stalked a donovan.
He tossed away the twig and raised the gun.
"No," said the Cytha sharply.
The donovan tramped purposefully forward and Duncan felt the prickling
of the skin along his back. It was a frightful thing. Nothing could
stand before a donovan. The screamers had turned tail and run when
they had heard it a couple of miles or more away.
The donovan was named for the first known human to be killed by one.
That first was only one of many. The roll of donovan-victims ran long,
and no wonder, Duncan thought. It was the closest he had ever been to
one of the beasts and he felt a coldness creeping over him. It was
like an elephant and a tiger and a grizzly bear wrapped in the
selfsame hide. It was the most vicious fighting machine that ever had
been spawned.
He lowered the rifle. There would be no point in shooting. In two
quick strides, the beast could be upon him.
The donovan almost stepped on him and he flinched away. Then the great
head lowered and gave the fallen tree a butt and the tree bounced for
a yard or two. The donovan kept on walking. Its powerfully muscled
stern moved into the brush and out of sight.
"Now we are even," said the Cytha. "I had to get some help."
Duncan grunted. He flexed the leg that had been trapped and he could
not feel the foot. Using his rifle as a cane, he pulled himself erect.
He tried putting weight on the injured foot and it screamed with pain.
He braced himself with the rifle and rotated so that he faced the
Cytha.
"Thanks, pal," he said. "I didn't think you'd do it."
"You will not hunt me now?"
Duncan shook his head. "I'm in no shape for hunting. I am heading
home."
"It was the _vua_, wasn't it? That was why you hunted me?"
"The _vua_ is my livelihood," said Duncan. "I cannot let you eat it."
The Cytha stood silently and Duncan watched it for a moment. Then he
wheeled. Using the rifle for a crutch, he started hobbling away.
The Cytha hurried to catch up with him.
"Let us make a bargain, mister. I will not eat the _vua_ and you will
not hunt me. Is that fair enough?"
"That is fine with me," said Duncan. "Let us shake on it."
He put down a hand and the Cytha lifted up a paw. They shook,
somewhat awkwardly, but very solemnly.
"Now," the Cytha said, "I will see you home. The screamers would have
you before you got out of the woods."
VI
They halted on a knoll. Below them lay the farm, with the _vua_ rows
straight and green in the red soil of the fields.
"You can make it from here," the Cytha said. "I am wearing thin. It is
an awful effort to keep on being smart. I want to go back to ignorance
and comfort."
"It was nice knowing you," Duncan told it politely. "And thanks for
sticking with me."
He started down the hill, leaning heavily on the rifle-crutch. Then he
frowned troubledly and turned back.
"Look," he said, "you'll go back to animal again. Then you will
forget. One of these days, you'll see all that nice, tender _vua_
and--"
"Very simple," said the Cytha. "If you find me in the _vua_, just
begin hunting me. With you after me, I will quickly get smart and
remember once again and it will be all right."
"Sure," agreed Duncan. "I guess that will work."
The Cytha watched him go stumping down the hill.
Admirable, it thought. Next time I have a brood, I think I'll raise a
dozen like him.
It turned around and headed for the deeper brush.
It felt intelligence slipping from it, felt the old, uncaring comfort
coming back again. But it glowed with anticipation, seethed with
happiness at the big surprise it had in store for its new-found
friend.
Won't he be happy and surprised when I drop them at his door, it
thought.
Will he be ever pleased!
--CLIFFORD D. SIMAK
*  *  *  *  *
MAY 1956 
35< 




SCIENCE FICTION 

'^WANTED- DEAD OR ALIVE by WILLY LEY 
VOLPLA by WYMAN GUIN 




Anyone For Doomsday? 

Not You! 

Not Us [ 

But It COULD happen, for anything is possible. And any- 
thing that IS possible~and can make a good story eoes 
into the pages of GALAXY Science Fiction. 

Doomsday is only one possible future out of many: 

The conquest of other planets . 

Invasions of Earth . 

Other dimensions . 

Immortality . 

Strange and exciting future civilizations that 
have their roots right in the present , , . 

Youll find all these and a lot more in GALAXY, the 
magazine of ideas brought vividly to life! 

For 12 convincing issues, send $3.50 
or $6.00 for 24 issues, 

TO 

galaxy Publishing Corp. 

421 Hudson Street  New York 14, N. Y. 



MARK Your Chokes 

EACH MARK Means 
Hours of Good Reading Enjoyment 



GALAXY PUBLISHING CO., INC. 

421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N. Y. 

IUasc sciul iiic ])ost-pai<l tlie novels cliecked below. 



-B- 


-+- 


 SINISTER BARRIER by Cfie Frank fiowti 




 B- 


-4- 








-tr 

 

 


5- 

6- 


-THE WORLD BELOW by S. Fowler Wright 
-THE ALIEN by Raymond F. Jones 




 B- 

-e- 


-8- 


ODD JOHN by OlaF Olapledon  


C 



 9 FOUR SIDED TRIANGLE by William F. Temple 

 10 RAT RACE by Jay Franklin 

 11 CITY IN THE SEA by Wilson Tucker 

 12 HOUSE OF MANY WORLDS by Sam Merwin, Jr. 

 13 SEEDS OF LIFE by John Taine 

 14 PEBBLE IN THE SKY by Isaac Asimov 

 15 THREE GO BACK by J. Leslie Mitchell 

 16 THE WARRIORS OF DAY by James Blish 

 17 WELL OF THE WORLDS by Louis Padgett 

 18 CITY AT WORLD'S END by Edmond Hamilton 

 19-JACK OF EAGLES by James Blish 

 20-BLACK GALAXY by Murray Leinster 

 21 THE HUMANOIDS by Jack Williamson 

 22- KILLER TO COME by Sam Merwin, Jr. 

 23-MURDER IN SPACE by David V. Reed 

 24-LEST DARKNESS FALL by L. Sprague de Camp 



6 For ^1.30/ 35c each 





Enclose check. 


$ 


cash or money order. 


Name 


We pay postage 



Address 

City State 




MAY, 1956 



VOL. 12, NO. I 



ealajQ' 

SCIENCE FICTION 

ALL ORIGINAL STORIES  NO REPRINTS! 
CONTENTS 



NOVELETS 



VOLPLA 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 


by Edward W. Ludwig 


6 

56 


SHORT STORIES 

NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 

ONE ACROSS 

BOOK-LENGTH SERIAI- fnncliiiion 


fay Jim Harmon 


29 

87 


SLAVE SHIP 




104 


SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 

FOR YOUR INFORMATION 


by Willy Ley 


43 


FEATURES 

EDITOR'S PAGE 

GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF.. 


fay H. L. Gold 

by Floyd C. Gale 


4 

100 



Cover by TOCCHET Alibiing "BUT, OFFiCER, I WAS ONLY DOING MACH II" 



ROBERT GUINN, Publi.!,;;^ " h. L. Gold, Editor 

EVELYN PAIGE, Managing Editor WILLY LEY, Science Editor 

W. I. VAN PER POEL, Art Director JOAN De MARIO, Production Manager 



o' Publishing Corporation. Main offices: 

this magazine are fiction, and any similarity betweL characte?r^d I peVsoos U 

Printed In the U.S.A. by the Guinn Co., Inc. Title peg. g.j. Pat. Off. 



Z 




I 

I 



1 



I 





Radio Network, 
a service of 









N.B.C . For Listening 

each Wednesdoy 

X-1 

Galaxy For Reading 
each Month 

X-1 

Now NBC Coast to Coast brings you the best from 
Galaxy Science Fiction each Wednesday night. 



Consult your newspaper for pro- 
gram time for X-Minus One on your 
local NBC Radio Station. 



X-1 

Here is adult Science Fiction, ex- 
citingly dramatized, by the best 
directors and adaptors  over the 
greatest Network  from the best 
of adult Science Fiction  Galaxy 
Magazine. 



0 . 0.051 






OF TWO MINDS 



j^TOST of the greatest contri- 
butions and biggest messes 
have been made by two kinds of 
brains  the devious and the lit- 
eral. Those of us who fall be- 
tween these extremes are gener- 
ally awed by the first and dis- 
mayed by the second. 

When I was writing fact-de- 
tective cases, I was impressed by 
the beautifully elaborate plans 
of a Chicago man who murdered 
his wife with all the brilliance of 
a chess master. But then I dis- 
covered why the police prefer in- 
genious crimes; with so many 
threads to hold, the complex crim- 
inal is bound to tangle himself up 
quickly. 

The devious slayer was caught 
in less than a day! 

But deviousness is almost al- 
ways a joy to watch. Not long 
ago. The New Yorker ran a piece 
by a writer who lacked repartee 
and thus was reduced to prepar- 
tee  setting up his gags in ad- 
vance. Living in the country, 
where power and phone lines top- 
ple in every storm, he saw a great 
possibility: 

It the power lines went down 
and the telephone wires didnt 
and he made a call to a neighbor 
and the wife answered instead oi 
the husband, hed have a perfect 
setup. 



That was a lot to ask, but it 
happened. He grabbed the phone, 
called, the wife answered, and he 
crowed, Where was Moses when 
the light went out? Mrs. Moses 
said, Down in the cellar. He 
thought it was the fuse. The 
writer said, Oh, and made some 
small talk about the storm, and 
disappointedly hung up. 

Naturally, he had to tell some- 
body, so he explained the joke to 
his wife, who listened stonily. 
Well, it was a funny idea, wasnt 
it? he demanded peevishly. Fun- 
ny, she said. Dont make me 
laugh. 

She, incidentally, once reported 
that a friend of hers goes to 
church religiously. 

With a wife like that, I sup- 
pose a man has no recourse but 
Erector Set thinking. Unfortu- 
nately, he just proves the cops 
are right  the more complicated 
reasoning gets, the more likely it 
is to fall apart. 

Yet theres no doubt that we 
need devious minds. During WW 
II, some genius hired science fic- 
tion writers to think up out- 
landish weapons and engineers to 
detail them  and then let the 
blueprints fall into enemy hands, 
thus lousing up their research. 

On the other hand, when Mac- 

(Continued on page 144) 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



4 





Circle numbers wanted enclosed $. 

123456789 10 

Name 

Address 

City State 



Each copy has six to eight stories 
by such top authors as Ray Brad- 
bury, Sam Merwin, Jr., Evelyn 
E. Smith, Frederik Pohl, Charles 
Satterfield, Philip K. Dick, Ted 
Sturgeon, Isaac Asimov, Wyman 
Guin, Damon Knight, L. Sprague 
de Camp, and many others. 

All ten for $2.75 only 
Any five $1 .50 
Any three $1 .00 
or 35c each postpaid. 



SPECIAL 



LIMITED OFFER 

BACK COPIES OF 

BEYCgiiD 



FANTASY 



FICTION 




i| 

i I 



I 



i 





Volpla 

By WYMAN GUIN 

The only kind of gag worth pulling, f alway$ 
ntaintained, was a cosmic one  till f learned 
the Cosmos has a really nasty sense of humorl 

Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS 



T here were three of 

them. Dozens of limp lit- 
tle mutants that would 
have sent an academic zoologist 
into hysterics lay there in the 
metabolic accelerator. But there 
were three of them. My heart 
took a great bound. 

I heard my daughters running 
feet in the animal rooms and her 
rollerskates banging at her side. 



I closed the accelerator and walk- 
ed across to the laboratory door. 
She twisted the knob violently, 
trying to hit a combination that 
would work. 

I unlocked the door, held it 
against her pushing and slipped 
out so that, for all her peering, she 
could see nothing. I looked down 
on her tolerantly. 

Cant adjust your skates? I 
asked again. 

Daddy, Ive tried and tried 
and I just cant turn this old key 
tight enough. 

I continued to look down on 
her. 

Well, Dad-dee, I cant! 

Tightly enough. 

What? 

You cant turn this old key 
tightly enough. 

Thats what I say-yud. 

All right, wench. Sit on this 
chair. 

I got down and shoved one sad- 
dle shoe into a skate. It fitted per- 
fectly. I strapped her ankle and 
pretended to use the key to tight- 
en the clamp. 

Volplas at last Three of them. 
Yet I had always been so sure I 
could create them that I had been 
calling them volplas for ten years. 
No, twelve.' I glanced across the 
animal room to where old Nijin- 
sky thrust his graying head from 
a cage. I had called them volplas 
since the day old Nijinskys elon- 
gated arms and his cousins lat- 



eral skin folds had given me the 
idea of a flying mutant. 

TTT-HEN NIJINSKY saw me 
looking at him, he started a 
little tarantella about his cage. 
I smiled with nostalgia when the 
fifth fingers of his hands, four 
times as long as the others, un- 
curled as he spun about the cage. 

I turned to the fitting of my 
daughters other skate. 

Daddy? 

Yes? 

Mother says you are eccentric. 
Is that true? 

Ill speak to her about it. 
Dont you know? 

Do you understand the word^ 
No. 

I lifted her out of the chair and 
stood her on her skates. Tell 
your mother that I retaliate. I 
say she is beautiful. 

She skated awkwardly between 
the rows of cages from which mu- 
tants with brown fur and blue fur, 
too much and too little fur, enor- 
mously long and ridiculously 
short arms, stared at her with 
simian, canine or rodent faces. At 
the door to the outside, she turned 
perilously and waved. 

Again in the laboratory, I en- 
tered the metabolic accelerator 
and withdrew the intravenous 
needles from my first volplas. I 
carried their limp little forms out 
to a mattress in the lab, two girls 
and a boy. The accelerator had 



forced them almost to adulthood 
in less than a month. It would be 
several hours before they would 
begin to move, to learn to feed 
and play, perhaps to learn to fly. 

Meanwhile, it was clear that 
here was no war of dominant mu- 
tations. Modulating alleles had 
smoothed the freakish into a 
beautiful pattern. These were no 
monsters blasted by the dosage of 
radiation into crippled structures. 
They were lovely, perfect little 
creatures. 

My wife tried the door, too, but 
more subtly, as if casually touch- 
ing the knob while calling. 

Lunch, dear. 

Be right there. 

She peeked too, as she had for 
fifteen years, but I blocked her 
view when I slipped out. 

Come ori, you old hermit. I 
have a buffet on the terrace. 

Our daughter says Im eccen- 
tric. Wonder how the devil she 
found out. 

From me, of course. 

But you love me just the 
same. 

I adore you. She stretched on 
tiptoe and put her arms over my 
shoulders and kissed me. 

My wife did indeed have a 
delicious-looking buffet ready on 
the terrace. The maid was just 
setting down a warmer filled with 
hot hamburgers. I gave the maid 
a pinch and said, Hello, baby. 

My wife looked at me with a 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



puzzled smile. What on Earths 
got into you? 

The maid beat it into the house. 
I flipped a hamburger and a 
slice of onion onto a plate and 
picked up the ketchup and said, 
Ive reached the dangerous age. 
Oh, good heavens! 

1 DOWSED ketchup over the 
hamburger, threw the onion 
on and closed it. I opened a bottle 
of beer and guzzled from it, blew 
out my breath and looked across 
the rolling hills and oak woods 
of our ranch to where the Pacific 
shimmered. I thought, All this 
and three volplas, too. 

I wiped the back of my hand 
across my mouth and said aloud, 
Yes, sir, the dangerous age. And, 
lady, Im going to have fun. 

My wife sighed patiently. 

I walked over and put the arm 
that held the beer bottle around 
her shoulder and chucked her 
chin up with my other hand. The 
golden sun danced in her blue 
eyes. I watched that light in her 
beautiful eyes and said, But 
youre the only one Im dangerous 
about. 

I kissed her until I heard 
rollerskates coming across the 
' terrace from one direction and a 
horse galloping toward the ter- 
race from the other direction. 

You have lovely lips, I whis- 
pered. 

Thanks. Yours deserve the 

L 



Good Housekeeping Seal of Ap- 
proval, too. 

Our son reared the new pala- 
mino I had just bought him for 
his fourteenth birthday and 
yelled down, Unhand that 
maiden, Burrhead, or Ill give you 
lead poisoning. 

I laughed and picked up my 
plate and sat down in a chair. My 
wife brought me a bowl of salad 
and I munched the hamburger 
and watched the boy unsaddle 
the horse and slap it away to the 
pasture. 

I thought, By God, wouldnt 
he have a fit if he knew what I 
have back there in that lab! 
Wouldnt they all! 

The boy carried the saddle up 
onto the terrace and dropped it. 
Mom, Id like a swim before I 
eat. He started undressing. 

You look as though a little 
water might help, she agreed, sit- 
ting down next to me with her 
plate. 

The girl was yanking off her 
skates. And I want one. 

All right. But go in the house 
and put on your swim suit. 

Oh, Mother. Why? 

Because, dear, I said so. 

The boy had already raced 
across the terrace and jack-knifed 
into the pool. The cool sound of 
the dive sent the girl scurrying 
for her suit. 

I looked at my wife. Whats 
the idea? 



VOLPLA 



9 



Shes going to be a young 
woman soon. 

Is that any reason for wearing 
clothes? Look at him. Hes a 
young man sooner than already. 
Well, if you feel that way 
about it, theyll both have to start 
wearing clothes. 

I gulped the last of my ham- 
burger and washed it down with 
the beer. This place is going to 
hell, I complained. The old 
man isnt allowed to pinch the 
maid and the kids cant go 
naked. I leaned toward her and 
smacked her cheek. But the food 
and the old woman are still the 
best. 

Say, what goes with you? 
Youve been grinning like a 
happy ape ever since you came 
out of the lab. 

I told you   

Oh, not that again! You were 
dangerous at any age. 

I stood up and put my plate 
aside and bent over her. Just 
the same, Im going to have a new 
kind of fun. 

CHE REACHED up and 
grabbed my ear. She nar- 
rowed her eyes and put a mock 
grimness on her lips. 

Its a joke, I assured her. Im 
going to play a tremendous joke 
on the whole world. Ive only had 
the feeling once before in a small 
way, but Ive always . . 

She twisted my ear and nar- 



rowed her eyes even more. 
Like? 

Well, when my old man was 
pumping his first fortune out of 
some oil wells in Oklahoma, we 
lived down there. Outside this lit- 
tle town, I found a litter of flat 
stones that had young black- 
snakes under each slab. I filled 
a pail with them and took them 
into town and dumped them on 
the walk in front of the movie 
just as Theda Baras matinee let 
out. The best part was that no 
one had seen me do it. They just 
couldnt understand how so many- 
snakes got there. I learned how 
great it can be to stand around 
quietly and watch people encoun- 
ter the surprise that you have pre- 
pared for them. 

She let go of my ear. Is that 
the kind of fun youre going to 
have? 

Yep. 

She shook her head. Did I say 
you are eccentric? 

I grinned. Forgive me if I eat 
and run, dear. Something in the 
lab cant wait. 

The fact was that I had some- 
thing more in the lab than I had 
bargained for. I had aimed only 
at a gliding mammal a little more 
efficient than the Dusky Glider 
of Australia, a marsupial. Even 
in the basically mutating colony, 
there had been a decidedly sim- 
ian appearance in recent years, a 
long shift from the garbage-dump 



10 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



rats I had started with. But my 
first volplas were shockingly hu- 
manoid. 

They were also much faster 
than had been their predecessors 
in organizing their nervous ac- 
tivity after the slumbrous explo- 
sion of growth in the metabolic 
accelerator. When I returned to 
the lab, they were already mov- 
ing about on the mattress and the 
male was trying to stand. 

He was a little, the larger and 
stood twenty-eight inches high. 
Except for the face, chest and 
belly, they were covered with a 
soft, almost golden down. Where 
it was bare of this golden fur, the 
skin was pink. On their heads and 
across the shoulders of the male 
stood a shock of fur as soft as 
chinchilla. The faces were appeal- 
ingly humanoid, except that the 
eyes were large and nocturnal. 
The cranium was in the same 
proportion to the body as it is in 
the human. 

TP7HEN THE male spread his 
^ arms, the span was forty- 
eight inches. I held his arms out 
and tried to tease the spars open. 
They were not new. The spars 
had been common to the basic 
colony for years and were the 
result of serial mutations effecting 
those greatly elongated fifth fin- 
gers that had first appeared in 
Nijinsky. No longer jointed like 
a finger, the spar turned back- 



ward sharply and ran alongside 
the wrist almost to the elbow. 
Powerful wrist muscles could 
snap it outward and forward. Sud- 
denly, as I teased the male volpla, 
this happened. 

The spars added nine inches on 
each side to his span. As they 
swept out and forward, the lateral 
skin that had, till now, hung in 
resting folds was tightened in a 
golden plane that stretched from 
the tip of the spar to his waist 
and continued four inches wide 
down his legs to where it an- 
chored at the little toe. 

This was by far the most im- 
pressive plane that had appeared 
till now. It was a true gliding 
plane, perhaps even a soaring 
one. I felt a thrill run along my 
back. 

By four oclock that afternoon, 
I was feeding them solid food 
and, with the spars closed, they 
were holding little cups and 
drinking water from them in a 
most humanlike way. They were 
active, curious, playful and decid- 
edly amorous. 

Their humanoid qualities were 
increasingly apparent. There was 
a lumbar curvature and buttocks. 
The shoulder girdle and pectoral 
muscles were heavy and out of 
proportion, of course, yet the fe- 
males had only one pair of 
breasts. The chin and jaw were 
humanlike instead of simian and 
the dental equipment was appro- 



VOLPLA 



11 



priate to this structure. What this 
portended was brought home to 
me with a shock. 

I was kneeling on the mattress, 
cuffing and roughing the male as 
one might a puppy dog, when one 
of the females playfully climbed 
up my back. I reached around 
and brought her over my shoulder 
and sat her down. I stroked the 
soft fur on her head and said, 
Hello, pretty one. Hello. 

The male watched me, grin- 
ning. 

He said, Elio, ello. 

A S I walked into the kitchen, 
giddy with this enormous 
joke, my wife said, Guy and Em 
are flying up for dinner. That 
rocket of Guys they launched in 
the desert yesterday was a suc- 
cess. It pulled Guy up to Cloud 
Nine and he wants to celebrate. 

I danced a little jig the way 
old Nijinsky might do it. Oh, 
great! Oh, wonderful! Good old 
Guy! Everybodys a success. Its 
great. Its wonderful. Success on 
success! 

I danced into the kitchen table 
and tipped over a basket of green 
corn. The maid promptly left the 
kitchen for some other place. 

My wife just stared at me. 
Have you been drinking the lab 
alcohol? 

Ive been drinking the nectar 
of the gods. My Hera, youre 
properly married to Zeus. Ive my 



own little Greeks descended from 
Icarus. 

She pretended a hopeless sag 
of her pretty shoulders. Wouldnt 
you just settle for a worldly mar- 
tini? 

I will, yes. But first a divine 
kiss. 

I sipped at my martini and 
lounged in a terrace chair watch- 
ing the golden evening slant 
across the beautiful hills of our 
ranch. I dreamed. I would invent 
a euphonious set of words to 
match the Basic English vocabu- 
lary and teach it to them as their 
language. They would have their 
own crafts and live in small tree 
houses. 

I would teach them legends: 
that they had come from the 
stars, that they had subsequently 
watched the first red men and 
then the first white men enter 
these hills. 

When they were able to take 
care of themselves, I would turn 
them loose. There would be vol- 
pla colonies all up and down the 
Coast before anyone suspected. 
One day, somebody would see a 
volpla. The newspapers would 
laugh. 

Then someone authoritative 
would find a colony and observe 
them. He would conclude, I am 
convinced that they have a lan- 
guage and speak it intelligently. 

The government would issue 
denials. Reporters would expose 



12 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



the truth and ask, Where have 
these aliens come from? The 
government would reluctantly 
admit the facts. Linguists would 
observe at close quarters and 
learn the simple volpla language. 
Then would come the legends. 

Volpla wisdom would become 
a cult  and of all forms of com- 
edy, cults, I think, are the fun- 
niest. 

44"|^ARLING, are you listen- 
L' ing to me? my wife asked 
with impatient patience. 

What? Sure. Certainly. 

You didnt hear a word. You 
just sit there and grin into space. 
She got up and poured me an- 
other martini. Here, maybe this 
will sober you up. 

I pointed. Thats probably 
Guy and Em. 

A copter sidled over the ridge, 
then came just above the oak 
woods toward us. Guy set it gen- 
tly on the landing square and we 
walked down to meet them. 

I helped Em out and hugged 
her. Guy jumped out, asking, Do 
you have your TV set on? 

No, I answered. Should I? 
Its almost time for the broad- 
cast. I was afraid we would miss 
it. 

What broadcast? 

From the rocket. 

Rocket? 

For heavens sake, darling, 
my wife complained, I told you 



about Gu 5 ^s rocket being a suc- 
cess. The papers are full of it. So 
are the broadcasts. 

As we stepped up on the ter- 
race, she turned to Guy and Em. 
Hes out of contact today. Thinks 
hes Zeus. 

I asked our son to wheel a TV 
set out onto the terrace while I 
made martinis for our friends. 
Then we sat down and drank the 
cocktails and the kids had fruit 
juice and we watched the broad- 
cast Guy had tuned in. 

Some joker from Cal Tech was 
explaining diagrams of a multi- 
stage rocket. 

After a bit, I got up and said, 
I have something out in the lab 
I want to check on. 

Hey, wait a minute, Guy ob- 
jected. Theyre about to show 
the shots of the launching. 

My wife gave me a look; you 
know the kind. I sat down. Then 
I got up and poured myself an- 
other martini and freshened Ems 
up, too. I sat down again. 

The scene had changed to a 
desert launching site. There was 
old Guy himself explaining that 
when he pressed the button be- 
fore him, the hatch on the third 
stage of the great rocket in the 
background would close and, five 
minutes later, the ship would fire 
itself. 

Guy, on the screen, pushed the 
button, and I heard Guy, beside 
me, give a sort of little sigh. We 



VOLPLA 



13 



watched the hatch slowly close. 

You look real good, I said. 
A regular Space Ranger. What 
are you shooting at? 

Darling, will you please  be 
 quiet? 

Yeah, Dad. Can it, will you? 
Youre always gagging around. 

THE screen, Guys big 
dead-earnest face was ex- 
plaining more about the project 
and suddenly I realized that this 
was an instrument-bearing rocket 
they hoped to land on the Moon. 
It would broadcast from there. 
Well, now  say, that would be 
something! I began to feel a little 
ashamed of the way I had been 
acting and I reached out and 
slapped old Guy on the shoulder. 
For just a moment, I thought of 
telling him about my volplas. But 
only for a moment. 

A ball of flame appeared at the 
base of the rocket. Miraculously, 
the massive tower lifted, seemed 
for a moment merely to stand 
there on a flaming pillar, then was 
gone. 

The screen returned to a stu- 
dio, where an announcer ex- 
plained that the film just shown 
had been taken day before yes- 
terday. Since then, the rockets 
third stage was known to have 
landed successfully at the south 
shore of Mare Serenitatis. He in- 
dicated the location on a large 
lunar map behind him. 

14 



From this position, the tele- 
meter known as Rocket Charlie 
will be broadcasting scientific 
data for several months. But now, 
ladies and gentlemen, we will 
clear the air for Rocket Charlies 
only general broadcast. Stand by 
for Rocket Charlie. 

A chronometer appeared on 
the screen and, for several sec- 
onds, there was silence. 

I heard my boy whisper, Uncle 
Guy, this is the biggest! 

My wife said, Em, I think Ill 
just faint. 

Suddenly there was a lunar 
landscape on the screen, looking 
just as its always been pictured. 
A mechanical voice cut in. 

This is Rocket Charlie saying, 
Hello, Earth, from my position 
in Mare Serenitatis. First I will 
pan the Menelaus Mountains for 
fifteen seconds. Then I will focus 
my camera on Earth for five sec- 
onds. 

The camera began to move and 
the mountains marched by, stark 
and awesomely wild. Toward the 
end of the movement, the shadow 
of the upright third stage ap- 
peared in the foreground. 

Abruptly the camera made a 
giddy swing, focused a moment, 
and we were looking at Earth. At 
that time, there was no Moon 
over California. It was Africa and 
Europe we were looking at. 

This is Rocket Charlie saying, 
Good-by, Earth.  

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Well, when that screen went 
dead, there was pandemonium 
around our terrace. Big old Guy 
was so happy, he was wiping tears 
from his eyes. The women were 
kissing him and hugging him. 
Everybody was yelling at once. 

1 USED THE metabolic acceler- 
ator to cut the volplas gesta- 
tion down to one week. Then I 
used it to bring the infants to 
maturity in one month. I had luck 
right off. Quite by accident, the 
majority of the early infants were 
females, which sped things up 
considerably. 

By the next spring, I had a col- 
ony of over a hundred volplas and 
I shut down the accelerator. From 
now on, they could have babies in 
their own way. 

I had devised the language for 
them, using Basic English as my 
model, and during the months 
while every female was busy 
in the metabolic accelerator, I 
taught the language to the males. 
They spoke it softly in high 
voices and the eight hundred 
words didnt seem to tax their 
little skulls a bit. 

My wife and the kids went 
down to Santa Barbara for a 
week and I took the opportunity 
to slip the oldest of the males 
and his two females out of the 
lab. 

I put them in the jeep beside 
me and drove to a secluded little 



valley about a mile back in the 
ranch. 

They were all three wide-eyed 
at the world and jabbered con- 
tinuously. They kept me busy re- 
lating their words for tree, 
rock, sky to the objects. They 
had a little trouble with sky. 

Until I had them out in the 
open country, it had been impos- 
sible to appreciate fully what 
lovely little creatures they were. 
They blended perfectly with the 
California landscape. Occasion- 
ally, when they raised their arms, 
the spars would open and spread 
those glorious planes. 

Almost two hours went by be- 
fore the male made it into the 
air. His playful curiosity about 
the world had been abandoned 
momentarily and he was chasing 
one of the girls. As usual, she 
was anxious to be caught and 
stopped abruptly at the bottom of 
a little knoll. 

He probably meant to dive for 
her. But when he spread his arms, 
the spars snapped out and those 
golden planes sheared into the 
air. He sailed over her in a stun- 
ning sweep. Then he rose up and 
iip until he hung in the breeze for 
a long moment, thirty feet above 
the ground. 

He turned a plaintive face back 
to me, dipped worriedly and 
skimmed straight for a thorn 
bush. He banked instinctively, 
whirled toward us in a golden 



VOLPIA 



IS 



flash and crashed with a bounce 
to the grass. 

The two girls reached him be- 
fore I did and stroked and fussed 
over him so that I could not get 
near. Suddenly he laughed with 
a shrill little whoop. After that, it 
was a carnival. 

^ I ''HEY LEARNED quickly and 
brilliantly. They were not fli- 
ers; they were gliders and soarers. 
Before long, they took agilely to 
the trees and launched them- 
selves in beautiful glides for hun- 
dreds of feet, banking, turning 
and spiraling to a gentle halt. 

I laughed out loud with antici- 
pation. Wait till the first pair of 
these was brought before a sher- 
iff! Wait till reporters from the 
Chornicle motored out into the 
hills to witness this! 

Of course, the volplas didnt 
want to return to the lab. There 
was a tiny stream through there 
and at one point it formed a siz- 
able pool. They got into this and 
splashed their long arms about 
and they scrubbed each other. 
Then they got out and lay on 
their backs with the planes 
stretched to dry. 

I watched them affectionately 
and wondered about the advisa- 
bility of leaving them out here. 
Well, it had to be done sometime. 
Nothing I could tell them about 
surviving would help them as 
much as a little actual surviving. 

16 



I called the male over to me. 

He came and squatted, confer- 
ence fashion, the elbows resting 
on the ground, the wrists crossed 
at his chest. He spoke first. 

Before the red men came, did 
we live here? 

You lived in places like this 
all along these mountains. Now 
there are very few of you left. 
Since you have been staying at 
my place, you naturally have for- 
gotten the ways of living out- 
doors. 

We can learn again. We want 
to stay here. His little face was 
so solemn and thoughtful that I 
reached out and stroked the fur 
on his head reassuringly. ' 

We both heard the whir of 
wings overhead. Two mourning 
doves flew across the stream and 
landed in an oak on the opposite 
hillside. 

I pointed. Theres your food, 
if you can kill it. 

He looked at me. How? 

I dont think you can get at 
them in the tree. Youll have to 
soar up above and catch one of 
them on the wing when they fly 
away. Think you can get up that 
high? 

He looked around slowly at the 
breeze playing in the branches 
and dancing along the hillside 
grass. It was as if he had been 
flying a thousand years and was 
bringing antique wisdom to bear. 

I can get up there. I can stay 

GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



for a while. How long will they 
be in the tree? 

Chances are they wont stay 
long. Keep your eye on the tree 
in case they leave while you are 
climbing. 

H e ran to a nearby oak and 
clambered aloft. Presently 
he launched himself, streaked 
down-valley a way and caught a 
warm updraft on a hillside. In no 
time, he was up about two hun- 
dred feet. He began criss-crossing 
the ridge, working his way back 
to us. 

The two girls were watching 
him intently. They came over to 
me wonderingly, stopping now 
and then to watch him. When 
they were standing beside me, 
they said nothing. They shaded 
their eyes with tiny hands and 
watched him as he passed directly 
above us at about two hundred 
and fifty feet. One of the girls, 
with her eyes fast on his soaring 
planes, reached out and grasped 
my sleeve tightly. 

He flashed high above the 
stream and hung behind the crest 
of the hill where the doves rested. 
I heard their mourning from the 
oak tree. It occurred to me they 
would not leave that safety while 
the hawklike silhouette of the 
volpla marred the sky so near. 

I took the girls hand from my 
sleeve and spoke to her, pointing 
as I did so. He is going to catch 



a bird. The bird is in that tree. 
You can make the bird fly so that 
he can catch it. Look here. I got 
up and found a stick. Can you 
do this? 

I threw the stick up into a tree 
near us. Then I found her a stick. 
She threw it better than I had 
expected. 

Good, pretty one. Now run 
across the stream and up to that 
tree and throw a stick into it. 

She climbed skillfully into the 
tree beside us and launched her- 
self across the stream. She 
swooped up the opposite hillside 
and landed neatly in the tree 
where the doves rested. 

The birds came out of the tree, 
climbing hard with their graceful 
strokes. 

I looked back, as did the girl 
remaining beside me. The soaring 
volpla half closed his planes and 
started dropping. He became a 
golden flash across the sky. 

The doves abruptly gave up 
their hard climbing and fell away 
with swiftly beating wings. I saw 
one of the male volplas planes 
open a little. He veered giddily in 
the new direction and again 
dropped like a molten arrow. 

The doves separated and began 
to zigzag down the valley. The 
volpla did something I would not 
have anticipated  he opened 
his planes and shot lower than 
the bird he was after, then swept 
up and intercepted the birds 



VOIPI A 



17 



crossward flight. 

I saw the planes close momen- 
tarily. Then they opened again 
and the bird plummeted to a hill- 
side. The volpla landed gently 
atop the hill and stood looking 
back at us. 

The volpla beside me danced 
up and down shrieking in a lan- 
guage all her own. The girl who 
had raised the birds from the tree 
volplaned back to us, yammering 
like a bluejay. 

TT WAS a herps welcome. He 

had to walk back, of course  
he had no way to carry such a 
load in flight. The girls glided 

18 



out to meet him. Their lavish af- 
fection held him up for a time, 
but eventually he strutted in like 
every human hunter. 

They were raptly curious about 
the bird. They poked at it, mar- 
veled at its feathers and danced 
about it in an embryonic rite of 
the hunt. But presently the male 
turned to me 

We eat this? 

I laughed and took his tiny, 
four-fingered hand. In a sandy 
spot beneath a great tree that 
overhung the creek, I built a 
small fire for them. This was an- 
other marvel, but first 1 wanted 
to teach them how to clean the 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



[ 



,r' 




Yes. I will bring many more 
of you, if you promise to keep 
them all here in this woods until 
the 3 rre ready to leave. 

I promise. He looked up at 
the night sky and, in the firelight, 
I saw his wonder. You say we 
came from there? 

The old ones of your kind told 
me so. Didnt they tell you? 

I cant remember any old ones. 
You tell me. 

The old ones told me you 
came long before the red men in 
a ship from the stars. Standing 
there in the dark, I had to grin, 
visioning the Simday supple- 
ments that would be written in 



bird. I showed them how to spit 
it and turn it over their fire. 

Later, I shared a small piece 
of the meat in their feast. They 
were gleeful and greasily amorous 
during the meal. 

When I had to leave, it was 
dark. I warned them to stand 
watches, keep the fire burning low 
and take to the tree above if any- 
thing approached. The male 
walked a little away with me 
when I left the fire. 

I said again, Promise me you 
wont leave here until weve made 
you ready for it. 

We like it here. We will stay. 
Tomorrow you bring more of us? 



VOLPLA 



19 



about a year, maybe even less. 

He looked into the sky for a 
long time. Those little lights are 
the stars? 

Thats right. 

Which star? 

I glanced about and presently 
pointed over a tree. From 
Venus. Then I realized I had 
blundered by passing him an 
English name. In your language 
Pohtah.  

He looked at the planet a long 
time and murmured, Venus. 
Pohtah. 

T^HAT NEXT week, I trans- 
ported all of the volplas out 
to the oak woods. There were a 
hundred and seven men, women 
and children. With no design on 
niy part, they tended to segregate 
into groups consisting of four to 
eight couples together with the 
current children of the women. 
Within these groups, the adults 
were promiscuous, but apparently 
not outside the group. The group 
thus had the appearance of a 
super-family and the males in- 
dulged and cared for all the chil- 
dren without reference to actual 
parenthood. 

By the end of the week, these 
super-families were scattered over 
about four square miles of the 
ranch. They had found a new 
delicacy, sparrows, and hunted 
them easily as they roosted at 
night. I had taught the volplas to 
20 



use the fire drill and they were 
already utilizing the local grasses, 
vines and brush to build marvel- 
ously contrived tree houses in 
which the young, and sometimes 
the adults, slept through midday 
and midnight. 

The afternoon my family re- 
turned home, I had a crew of 
workmen out tearing down the 
animal rooms and lab building. 
The caretakers had anesthetized 
all the experimental mutants, and 
the metabolic accelerator and 
other lab equipment was being 
dismantled. I wanted nothing 
around that might connect the 
sudden appearance of the volplas 
with my property. It was already 
apparent that it would take the 
volplas only a few more weeks to 
learn their means of survival and 
develop an embryonic culture of 
their own. Then they could leave 
my ranch and the fun would be 
on. 

My wife got out of the car and 
looked around at the workmen 
hurrying about the disemboweled 
buildings and she said, What on 
Earth is going on here? 

Ive finished my work and we 
no longer need the buildings. Im 
going to write a paper about my 
results. 

My wife looked at me apprais- 
ingly and shook her head. I 
thought you meant it. But you 
really ought to. It would be your 
first. 

GAlAXy SCIENCE FICTION 



My son asked, What happened 
to the animals? 

Turned them over to the uni- 
versity for further study, I lied. 

Well, he said to her, you 
cant say our pop isnt a man of 
decision. 

Twenty-four hours later, there 
wasnt a sign of animal experi- 
mentation on the ranch. 

Except, of course, that the 
woods were full of volplas. At 
night, I could hear them faintly 
when I sat out on the terrace. As 
they passed through the dark 
overhead, they chattered and 
laughed and sometimes moaned 
in winged love. One night a flight 
of them soared slowly across the 
face of the full Moon, but I was 
the only one who noticed. 

I MADE DAILY trips out to 
the original camp to meet the 
oldest of the males, who had ap- 
parently established himself as 
a chief of all the volpla families. 
He assured me that the volplas 
were staying close to the ranch, 
but complained that the game 
was getting scarce. Otherwise 
things were progressing nicely. 

The males now carried little 
stone-tipped spears with feathered 
shafts that they could throw in 
flight. They used them at night 
to bring down roosting sparrows 
and in the day to kill their big- 
gest game, the local rabbits. 

The women wore b 1 u e j a y 



feathers on their heads. The men 
wore plumes of dove feathers and 
sometimes little skirts fashioned 
of rabbit down. I did some read- 
ing on the subject and taught 
them crude tanning of their rab- 
bit and squirrel hides for use in 
their tree homes. 

The tree homes were more and 
more intricately wrought with ex- 
pert basketry for walls and floor 
and tight thatching above. They 
were well camouflaged from 
below, as I suggested. 

These little creatures delighted 
me more and more. For hours, I 
could watch the adults, both the 
males and females, playing with 
the children or teaching them to 
glide. I could sit all afternoon and 
watch them at work on a tree 
house. 

So one day my wife asked, 
How does the mighty hunter 
who now returns from the forest? 

Oh, fine. Ive been enjoying 
the local animal life. 

So has our daughter. 

What do you mean? 

She has two of them up in her 
room. 

Two what? 

I dont know. What do you 
call them? 

I went up the stairs three at a 
time and burst into my daughters 
room. 

There she sat on her bed read- 
ing a book to two volplas. 

One of the volplas grinned and 



VOLPLA 



21 



said in English, Hello there, King 
Arthur. 

Whats going on here? I de- 
manded of all three. 

Nothing, Daddy. Were just 
reading like we always do. 

Like always? How long has 
this been going on? 

Oh, weeks and weeks. How 
long has it been since you came 
here that first time to visit me. 
Fuzzy? 

The impolite volpla who had 
addressed me as King Arthur 
grinned at her and calculated. 
Oh, weeks and weeks. 

But youre teaching them to 
read English. 

Of course. Theyre such good 
pupils and so grateful. Daddy, 
you wont make them go away, 
will you? We love each other, 
dont we? 

Both V o 1 p 1 a s nodded vigor- 
ously. 

She turned back to me. 
Daddy, did you know they can 
fly? They can fly right out of the 
window and way up in the sky. 

Is that a fact? I said testily. 

I looked coldly at the two volplas. 
Im going to speak to your chief. 

rjACK DOWNSTAIRS again, 

I raved at my wife. Why 
didnt you tell me a thing like this 
was going on? How could you let 
such an unusual thing go on and 
not discuss it with me? 

My wife got a look on her face 



that I dont see very often. Now 
you listen to me, mister. Your 
whole life is a secret from us. 
Just what makes you think your 
daughter cant have a little secret 
of her own? 

She got right up close to me 
and her blue eyes snapped little 
sparks all over me. The fact is 
that I was wrong to tell you at 
all. I promised her I wouldnt tell 
anyone. Look what happened 
when I did. You go leaping 
aroimd the house like a raving 
maniac just because a little girl 
has a secret. 

A fine secret! I yelled. Didnt 
it occur to you this might be dan- 
gerous? Those creatures are over- 
sexed and ... I stumbled into an 
awful silence while she gave me 
the dirtiest smile since the days 
of the Malatestas. 

How did you . suddenly get 
to be . the palace eunuch? 
Those are sweet lovable little 
creatures without a harm in their 
furry little bodies. But dont think 
I dont realize whats been going 
on. You created them yourself. 
So, if they have any dirty ideas, 

I know where they got them. 

I stormed out of the house. I 
spun the jeep out of the yard and 
ripped off through the woods. 

The chief was sitting at home 
as comfortable as you please. He 
was leaning back against the 
great oak that hid his tree house. 
He had a little fire going and one 



22 



6AIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



of the women was roasting a spar- 
row for him. He greeted me in 
volpla language. 

Do you realize, I blurted an- 
grily, that there are two volplas 
in my daughters bedroom? 

Why, yes, he answered 
calmly. They go there every day. 
Is there anything wrong with 
that? 

Shes teaching them the words 
of men. 

You told us some men may be 
our enemies. We are anxious to 
know their words, the better to 
protect ourselves. 

He reached atound behind the 
tree and, right there in broad day- 
light, that volpla pulled a copy 
of the San Francisco Chronicle 
out of hiding. He held it up apolo- 
getically. We have been taking 
it for some time from the box in 
front of your house. 

He spread the paper on the 
ground between us. I saw by the 
date that it was yesterdays. He 
said proudly, Trom the two who 
go to your house, I have learned 
the words of men. As men say, I 
can read most of this. 

1 JUST STOOD there gaping at 
him. How could I possibly re- 
coup this situation so that the 
stunning joke of the volplas 
wouldnt be lost? Would it seem 
reasonable that the volplas, by 
observing and listening to men, 
had learned their language? Or 



had they been taught it by a 
human friend? 

That was it  I would just 
have to sacrifice anonymity. My 
family and I had found a colony 
of them on our ranch and taught 
them English. I was stuck with it 
because it was the truth. 

The volpla waved his long thin 
arm over the front page. Men 
are dangerous. They will shoot 
us with their guns if we leave 
here. 

I hastened to reassure him. It 
will not be like that. When men 
have learned about you, they will 
leave you alone. I stated this 
emphatically, but for the first 
time I was beginning to see this 
might not be a joke to the volplas. 
Nevertheless, I went on. You 
must disperse the families at once. 
You stay here wtih your family 
so we remain in contact, but send 
the other families to other places. 

He shook his head. We cannot 
leave these woods. Men would 
shoot us. 

Then he stood and looked 
squarely at me with his nocturnal 
eyes. Perhaps you are not a good 
friend. Perhaps you have lied to 
us. Why are you saying we should 
leave this safety? 

You will be happier. There 
will be more game. 

He continued to stare directly 
at me. There will be men. One 
has already shot one of us. We 
have forgiven him and are 



VOLPLA 



23 



friends. But one of us is dead. 
You are friends with another 
man? I asked, stunned. 

He nodded and pointed up the 
valley. He is up there today with 
another family. 

Lets go! 

He had the advantage of short 
glides, but the volpla chief 
couldnt keep up with me. Some- 
times trotting, sometimes walking 
fast, I got way ahead of him. My 
hard breathing arose as much out 
of my anxiety about the manner 
of handling this stranger as it did 
out of the exertion. 

I rounded a bend in the creek 
and there was my son sitting on 
the grass near a cooking fire play- 
ing with a baby volpla and talk- 
ing in English to an adult volpla 
who stood beside him. As I ap^ 
proached, my son tossed the baby 
into the air. The tiny planes 
opened and the baby drifted 
down to his waiting hands. 

He said to the volpla beside 
him, No, Im sure you didnt 
come from the stars. The more I 
think about it, the more Im sure 
my father   

I yelled from behind them, 
What business do you have tell- 
ing them that? 

*'j''HE MALE volpla jumped 
about two feet. My son 
turned his head slowly and looked 
at me. Then he handed the baby 
to the male and stood up. 

24 



You havent any business out 
here! I was seething. He had 
destroyed the whole store of vol- 
pla legends with one small doubt. 

He brushed the grass from his 
trousers and straightened. The 
way he was looking at me, I felt 
my anger turning to a kind of 
jelly. 

Dad, I killed one of these lit- 
tle people yesterday. I thought 
he was a hawk and I shot him 
when I was out hunting. I 
wouldnt have done that if you 
had told me about them. 

I couldnt look at him. I stared 
at the grass and my face got hot. 

"The chief tells me that you 
want them to leave the ranch 
soon. You think youre going to 
play a big joke, dont you? 

I heard the chief come up be- 
hind me and stand quietly at my 
back. 

My son said softly, I dont 
think its much of a joke. Dad. 

I had to listen to that one crying 
after I hit him. 

There were big black trail ants 
moving in the grass. It seemed to 
me there was a ringing sound in 
the sky. I raised my head and 
looked at him. Son, lets go back 
to the jeep and we can talk about 
it on the way home. 

Id rather walk. He sort of 
waved to the volpla he had been 
talking to and then to the chief. 
He jumped the creek and walked 
away into the oak woods. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



The volpla holding the baby 
stared at me. From somewhere 
far up the valley, a crow was caw- 
ing. I didnt . look at the chief. I 
turned and brushed past him and 
walked back to the jeep alone. 

At home, I opened a bottle of 
beer and sat out on the terrace 
to wait for my son. My wife came 
toward the house with some cut 
flowers from the garden, but she 
didnt speak to me. She snapped 
the blades of the scissors as she 
walked. 

A volpla soared across the ter- 
race and landed at my daughters 
bedroom window. He was there 
only briefly and relaunched him- 
self. He was followed from the 
window in moments by the two 
V o 1 p 1 a s I had left with my 
daughter earlier in the afternoon. 
I watched them with a vague un- 
ease as the three veered off to the 
east, climbing effortlessly. 

When I finally took a sip of my 
beer, it was already warm. I set 
it aside. Presently my daughter 
ran out onto the terrace. 

Daddy, my volplas left. They 
said good-by and we hadnt even 
finished the TV show. They said 
they wont see me again. Did you 
make them leave? 

No. I didnt. 

She was staring at me with hot 
eyes. Her lower lip protruded and 
trembled like a pink tear drop. 

Daddy, you did so. She 
stomped into the house, sobbing. 



My God! In one afternoon, I 
had managed to become a palace 
eunuch, a murderer and a liar! 

M ost of the afternoon went 
by before I heard my son 
enter the house. I called to him 
and he came out and stood before 
me. I got up. 

Son, I cant tell you how sorry 
I am for what happened to you. 
It was my fault, not yours at all. 
I only hope you can forget the 
shock of finding out what sort of 
creature you had hit. I dont know 
why I didnt anticipate that such 
things would happen. It was just 
that I was so intent on mystifying 
the whole world that I . . 

I stopped. There wasnt any- 
thing more to say. 

Are you going to make them 
leave the ranch? he asked. 

I was aghast. After what has 
happened? 

Gee, what are you going to do 
about them. Dad? 

Ive been trying to decide. I 
dont know what I should do that 
will be best for them. I looked 
at my watch. Lets go back out 
and talk to the chief. 

His eyes lighted and he 
clapped me on the shoulder, man 
to man. We ran out and got into 
the jeep and drove back up to 
the valley. The late afternoon 
Sun glared across the landscape. 

We didnt say much as we 
wound up the valley between the 



VOLPLA 



25 



darkening trees. I was filled more 
and more with the unease that 
had seized me as I watched the 
three volplas leave my terrace 
and climb smoothly and purpose- 
fully into the east. 

We got out at the chiefs camp 
and there were no volplas around. 
The fire had burned down to a 
smolder. I called in the volpla 
language, but there was no an- 
swer. 

We went from camp to camp 
and found dead fires. We climbed 
to their tree houses and found 
them empty. I was sick and 
scared. I called endlessly till I 
was hoarse. 

At last, in the darkness, my son 
put a hand on my arm. What are 
you going to do. Dad? 

Standing there in those terribly 
silent woods, I trembled. Ill have 
to call the police and the news- 
papers and warn everybody. 

Where do you suppose theyve 
gone? 

I looked to the east where the 
stars, rising out of the great pass 
in the mountains, glimmered like 
a deep bowl of fireflies. 

**The last three I saw were 
headed that way. 

HAD been gone from the 
^ house for hours. When we 
stepped out onto the lighted ter- 
race, I saw the shadow of a heli- 
copter down on the strip. Then I 
saw Guy sitting near me in a 

26 



chair. He was holding his head in 
his hands. 

Em was saying to my wife, He 
was beside himself. There wasnt 
a thing he could do. I had to get 
him away from there and I 
thought you wouldnt mind if we 
flew over here and stayed with 
you till theyve decided what to 
do. 

I walked over and said, Hello, 
Guy. Whats the matter? 

He raised his head and then 
stood and shook hands. Its a 
mess. The whole project will be 
ruined and we dont dare go near 
it. 

What happened? 

Just as we set it off   

Set what off? 

The rocket. 

Rocket? 

Guy groaned. 

The Venus rocket! Rocket 
Harold! 

My wife interjected. I was tell- 
ing Guy we didnt know a thing 
about it because they havent de- 
livered our paper in weeks. Ive 
complained   

I waved her to silence. Go on, 

I demanded of Guy. 

Just as I pushed the button 
and the hatch was closing, a flock 
of owls circled the ship. They 
started flying through the hatch 
and somehow they jammed it 
open. 

Em said to my wife, There 
must have been a hundred of 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




them. They kept coming and com- 
ing and flying into that hatch. 
Then they began dumping out 
all the recording instruments. The 
men tried to run a motor-driven 
ladder up to the ship and those 
owls hit the driver on the head 
and knocked him out with some 
kind of instrument. 

Guy turned his grief-stricken 
face to me. Then the hatch 
closed and we dont dare go near 
the ship. It was supposed to fire 
in five minutes, but it hasnt. 
Those damned owls could have. . 
There was a glare in the east. 
We all turned and saw a brief 
streak of gilt pencil its way 
up the black velvet beyond the 
mountains. 

Thats it! Guy shouted. 
Thats the ship! Then he moan- 
ed. A total loss. 

I grabbed him by the shoulders. 
You mean it wont make it to 
Venus? 

He jerked away in misery. 
Sure, it will make it. The auto- 
matic controls cant be tampered 
with. But the rocket is on its way 
without any recording instru- 
ments or TV aboard. Just a load 
of owls. 

My son laughed. Owls! My 
dad can tell you a thing or two. 
I silenced him with a scowl. 
He shut up, then danced off across 
the terrace. Man, man! This is 
the biggest! The most  the great- 
est  the end! 



VOLPLA 



27 



^T^HE PHONE was ringing. As 
I went to the box on the ter- 
race, I grabbed my boys arm. 
Dont you breathe a word. 

He giggled. The joke is on you, 
Pop. Why should I say anything? 
Ill just grin once in a while. 
Now you cut that out. 

He held onto my arm and walk- 
ed toward the phone box with me, 
half convulsed. Wait till men 
land on Venus and find Venusians 
with a legend about their Great 
White Father in California. Thats 
when Ill tell. 

The phone call was from a 
screaming psychotic who wanted 
Guy. I stood near Guy while he 
listened to the excited voice over 
the wire. 

Presently Guy said, No, no. 
The automatic controls will cor- 
rect for the delay in firing. It isnt 
that. Its just that there arent any 
instruments. What? What just 
happened? Calm down. I cant un- 
derstand you. 

I heard Em say to my wife, 
You know, the strangest thing 
occurred out there. I thought it 
looked like those owls were car- 
rying things on their backs. One 
of them dropped something and 
I saw the men open a package 
wrapped in a leaf. Youd never 
believe what was in it  ^three lit- 
tle birds roasted to a nice brown! 
My son nudged me. Smart 
owls. Long trip. 

I put my hand over his mouth. 



Then I saw that Guy was holding 
the receiver limply away from his 
ear. 

He spluttered. They just taped 
a radio message from the rocket. 
Its true that the radio wasnt 
thrown out. But we didnt have a 
record like this on that rocket. 

He yelled into the phone. Play 
it back. He thrust the receiver 
at me. 

For a moment, there was only 
a gritty buzz from the receiver. 
Then the tape started playing a 
soft, high voice. This is Rocket 
Harold saying ever3dhing is well. 
This is Rocket Harold saying 
good-by to men. There was a 
pause and then, in clear volpla 
language, another voice spoke. 
Man who made us, we forgive 
you. We know we did not come 
from the stars, but we go there. 
I, chief, give you welcome to visit. 
Good-by. 

ALL stood around too ex- 
 hausted by the excitement 
to say anything. I was filled with 
a big, sudden sadness. 

I stood for a long time and 
looked out to the east, where the 
sprawling mountain range held a 
bowl of dancing fireflies between 
her black breasts. 

Presently I said to old Guy, 
How long do you think it will 
be before you have a manned 
rocket ready for Venus? 

 WYMAN GWN 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



28 



Name 

your symptom 

By JIM HARMON 

Illustrated by WEISS 



Anybody who shunned a Cure 
needed his head examined  
assuming he had one left! 



H enry infield placed 

the insulated circlet on 
his head gently. The 
gleaming rod extended above his 
head about a foot, the wires from 
it leading down into his collar, 
along his spine and finally out 
his pants leg to a short metallic 
strap that dragged on the floor. 



Clyde Morgan regarded his 
partner. Suppose  just suppose 
 you were serious about this, 
why not just the shoes? 

Infield turned his soft blue 
eyes to the black and tan ox- 
fords with the very thick rubber 
soles. They might get soaked 
through. 



NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



29 



Morgan took his foot off the 
chair behind the desk and sat 
down. Suppose they were soaked 
through and you were standing 
on a metal plate  steps or a 
manhole cover  what good 
would your lightning rod do you 
then? 

Infield shrugged slightly. I 
suppose a man must take some 
chances. 

Morgan said, You cant do it, 
Henry. Youre crossing the line. 
The people we treat are on one 
side of the line and were on the 
other. If you cross that line, you 
wont be able to treat people 
again. 

The small man looked out the 
large window, blinking myopical- 
ly at the brassy sunlight. Thats 
just it, Clyde. There is a line be- 
tween us, a wall. How can we 
really understand the people who 
come to us, if we hide on our 
side of the wall? 

Morgan shook his thick head, 
ruffling his thinning red hair. I 
dunno, Henry, but staying on our 
side is a pretty good way to keep 
sane and thats quite an accom- 
plishment these days. 

Infield whirled and stalked to 
the desk. Thats the answer! The 
whole world is going mad and we 
are just sitting back watching it 
hike along. Do you know that 
what we are doing is really the 
most primitive medicine in the 
world? We are treating the symp>- 

30 



toms and not the disease. One 
cannibal walking another with 
sleeping sickness doesnt cure 
anything. Eventually the savage 
 just as all those sick sav- 
ages out in the street will die un- 
less we can cure the disease, not 
only the indications. 

IY/TORGAN shifted his ponder- 
--ious weight uneasily. Now, 
Henry, its no good to talk like 
that. We psychiatrists cant turn 
back the clock. There just arent 
enough of us or enough time to 
give that old-fashioned therapy 
to all the sick people. 

Infield leaned on the desk and 
glared. I called myself a psychi- 
atrist once. But now I know were 
semi-mechanics, semi-engineers, 
semi-inventors, semi lots of other 
things, but certainly not even 
semi-psychiatrists. A psychiatrist 
wouldnt give a foetic gyro to a 
man with claustrophobia. 

His mind went back to the 
first gyro ball he had ever issued; 
the remembrance of his pride in 
the thing sickened him. Floating 
before him in memory was the 
vertical hoop and the horizontal 
hoop, both of shining steel-imper- 
vium alloy. Transfixed in the twin 
circles was the face of the patient, 
slack with smiles and sweat. But 
his memory was exaggerating the 
human element. The gyro actu- 
ally passed over a mans shoulder, 
through his legs, under his arms. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



31 



Any time he felt the walls creep- 
ing in to crush him, he could with- 
draw his head and limbs into the 
circle and feel safe. Steel-imper- 
vium alloy could resist even a 
nuclear explosion. The foetic gyro 
ball was worn day and night, for 
life. 

The sickness overcame him. 
He sat down on Morgans desk. 
Thats just one thing, the gyro 
ball. There are so many others, 
so many. 

Morgan smiled. You know, 
Henry, not all of our Cures are 
so  so  not all are like that. 
Those Cures for mother com- 
plexes arent even obvious. If any- 
body does see that button in a 
patients ear, it looks like a hear- 
ing aid. Yet for a nominal sum, 
the patient is equipped to hear 
the soothing recorded voice of his 
mother saying, Its all right, 
everythings all right. Mommy 
loves you, its all right . . 

But is everything all right? 
Infield asked intensely. Suppose 
the patient is driving over one 
hundred on an icy road. He thinks 
about slowing down, but theres 
the voice in his ear. Or suppose 
hes walking down a railroad 
track and hears a train whistle 
 if he can hear anything over 
that verbal pablum gushing in 
his ear. 

Morgans face stiffened. You 
know as well as I do that those 
voices are nearly subsonic. They 

32 



dont cut a sense efi^ciency more 
than 23 per cent. 

At first, Clyde  only at first. 
But what about the severe case 
where we have to burn a three- 
dimensional smiling mother-image 
on the eyes of the patient with 
radiation? With that image over 
everything he sees and with that 
insidious voice drumming in his 
head night and day, do you mean 
to say that mans senses will only 
be impaired 23 per cent? Why, 
hell turn violently schizophrenic 
sooner or later  and you know 
it. The only cure we have for 
that is still a straitjacket, a 
padded cell or one of those inhu- 
man lobotomies. 

Morgan shrugged helplessly. 
Youre an idealist. 

Youre damned right! Infield 
slammed the door behind him. 

1 1 3HE cool air of the street was 
A a relief. Infield stepped into 
the main stream of human traffic 
and tried to adjust to the second 
change in the air. People didnt 
bathe very often these days. 

He walked along, buffeted by 
the crowd, carried along in this 
direction, shoved back in that 
direction. Most people in the 
crowd seemed to be Normals, but 
you couldnt tell. Many Cures 
were not readily apparent. 

A young man with black glass- 
es and a radar headset (a pho- 
tophobe) was unable to keep 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



from being pushed against Infield. 
He sounded out the lightning rod, 
his face changing when he real- 
ized it must be some kind of Cure. 
Pardon me, he said warmly. 

Quite all right 

It was the first time in years 
that anyone had apologized to 
Infield for anything. He had been 
one of those condemned Normals, 
more to be scorned than pitied. 
Perhaps he could really get to 
understand these people, now that 
he had taken down the wall. 

Suddenly something else was 
pushing against Infield, forcing 
the air from his lungs. He stared 
down at the magnetic suction 
dart clinging leechlike to his 
chest Model Acrophobe 101-X, 
he catalogued immediately. De- 
scription; safety belt. But his 
emotions didnt behave so well. 
He was thoroughly terrified, heart 
racing, sweat glands pumping. 
The impervium cable undulated 
vulgarly. Some primitive fear of 
make symbols? his mind won- 
dered while panic crushed him. 

Uncouple that cable! the 
shout rang out. It was not his 
own. - 

A clean-cut young man with 
mouse-colored hair was moving 
toward the stubble-chinned, 
heavy-shouldered man quivering 
in the center of a web of imper- 
vium cables stuck secure to the 
walls and windows of buildings 
facing the street, the sidewalk, a 



mailbox, the lamp post and In- 
field. 

Mouse-hair yelled hoarsely, 
Uncouple it, Davies! Cant you 
see the guys got a lightning rod? 
Youre grounding him! 

I cant, Davies groaned. Im 
scared! 

Halfway down the twenty feet 
of cable. Mouse-hair grabbed on. 
Im holding it. Release it, you 
hear? 

Davies fumbled for the broad 
belt around his thickening mid- 
dle. He jabbed the button that 
sent a negative current through 
the cable. The magnetic suction 
dart dropfjed away from Infield 
like a thing that had been alive 
and now was killed. He felt an 
overwhelming sense of relief. 

A fter breathing deeply for 
a few moments, he looked up 
to see Davies releasing and draw- 
ing all his darts into his belt, mak- 
ing it resemble a Hydra-sized 
spiked dog collar. Mouse-hair 
stood by tensely as the crowd 
d'sassembled. 

This isnt the first time youve 
pulled something like this, Da- 
vies, he said. You werent too 
scared to release that cable. You 
just dont care about other peo- 
ples feelings. This is official. 
Mouse-hair drove a fast, hard 
right into the soft blue flesh of 
Davies chin. The big man fell 
silently. 



NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



33 



The other turned to Infield. 
He was unconscious on his feet, 
he explained. He never knew he 
fell. 

What did you mean by that 
punch being official? Infield 
asked while trying to arrange his 
feelings into the comfortable, fa- 
miliar patterns. 

The young mans eyes almost 
seemed to narrow, although his 
face didnt move; he merely ra- 
diated narrowed eyes. How long 
have you been Cured? 

Not  not long, Infield 
evaded. 

The other glanced around the 
street. He moistened his lips and 
spoke slowly. Do you think you 
might be interested in joining a 
fraternal organization of the 
Cured? 

Infields pulse raced, trying to 
get ahead of his thoughts, and 
losing out. A chance to study a 
pseudo-culture of the Cured 
developed in isolation! Yes, I 
think I might. I owe you a drink 
for helping me out. How about 
it? 

The mans face paled so fast. 
Infield thought for an instant 
that he was going to faint. All 
right. Ill risk it. He touched the 
side of his face away from the 
psychiatrist. 

Infield shifted around, trying to 
see that side of his benefactor, 
but couldnt manage it in good 
grace. He wondered if the fellow 






was sporting a Mom-voice heaj 
ing aid and was afraid of raisin] 
her ire. He cleared his throat, no 
ticing the affectation of it. Mj 
names Infield. 

Price, the other answered ab. 
sently. George Price. I suppose 
they have liquor at the Club. We 
can have a drink there, I guess."; 

Price set the direction and 
field fell m at his side. Look, if 
you dont drink. Ill buy you a 
cup of coffee. It was just a sug- 
gestion. 

TTNDER the mousy hair, 
Prices strong features were 
beginning to gleam moistly. You 
are lucky in one way, Mr. Infield. 
People take one look at your 
Cure and dont ask you to go 
walking in the rain. But even 
after seeing this, some people 
still ask me to have a drink. 
This was revealed, as he turned 
his head, to be a small metal 
cube above his left ear. 

Infield supposed it was a Cure, 
although he had never issued one 
like it. He didnt know if it would 
be good form to inquire what 
kind it was. 

Its a cure for alcoholism, 
Price told him. It runs a constant 
blood check to see that the al- 
cohol level doesnt go over the 
sobriety limit. 

What happens if you take one 
too many? 

Price looked off as if at some- 



thing not particularly interesting, 

more interesting than what 
he was saying. It drives a needle 
into my temple and kills me. 

The psychiatrist felt cold fury 
rising in Wm- 

supposed to save lives, not en- 
danger them. 

What kind of irresponsible 
idiot could have issued such a 
device? he demanded angrily. 

I did, Price said. I used to 
be a psychiatrist. I was always 
good in shop. This is a pretty 
effective mechanism, if I say so 
myself. It cant be removed with- 
out causing my death and its in- 
destructible. Impervium-shielded, 
you see. 

Price probably would never 
get crazed enough for liquor to 
kill himself. Infield knew. The 
threat of death would keep him 
constantly shocked sane. Men 
hide in the comforts of insanity, 
but when faced with death, they 
are often forced back to reality. 
A man cant move his legs; in a 
fire, though, he may run. His legs 
were definitely paralyzed before 
and may be again, but for one 
moment he would forget the 
moral defeat of his life and his 
withdrawal from life and live an 
enforced sanity. But sometimes 
the withdrawal was  or could 
become  too complete. 

Were here. 

Infield looked up self-con- 
sciously and noticed that they 

NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 

- aaaa:..- ^ 



had crossed two streets from his 
building and were standing in _ 
front of what appeared to be a 
small, dingy cafe. He followed 
Price through the screeching 
screen door. 

They seated themselves at a 
small table with a red-checked 
cloth. Infield wondered why 
cheap bars and restaurants al- 
ways used red-checked cloths. 
Then he looked closer and dis- 
covered the reason. They did a 
remarkably good job of camou- 
flaging the spots of grease and 
alcohol. 

A FAT man who smelled of the 
grease and alcohol of the 
tablecloths shuffled up to them 
with a towel on his arm, staring 
ahead of him at some point in 
time rather than space. 

Price lit a cigarette with un- 
steady hands. Reggie is studying 
biblical text. Cute gadget. His 
contact lenses are made up a lot 
of layers of polarized glass. Every 
time he blinks, the amount of 
polarization changes and a new 
page appears. His father once 
told him that if he didnt study 
his Bible and pray for him, his 
old dad would die. 

The psychiatrist knew the 
threat on the fathers part couldnt 
create such a fixation by itself. 
His eyebrows faintly inquired. 

Price nodded jerkily. Twenty 
years ago, at least. 



34 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



35 



Whatll you have, Georgie? 
Reggie asked. 

The young man snubbed out 
his cigarette viciously. Bourbon. 
Straight. 

Reggie smiled  a toothy, 
vacant, comedy-relief smile. Fine. 
The Good Book says a little 
wine is good for a man, or some- 
thing like that. I dont remember 
exactly. 

Of course he didnt. Infield 
knew. Why should he? It was 
useless to learn his Bible lessons 
to save his father, because it was 
obvious his father was dead. He 
would never succeed because 
there was no reason to succeed. 
But he had to try, didnt he, for 
his fathers sake? He didnt hate 
his father for making him study. 
He didnt want him to die. He 
had to prove that. 

Infield sighed. At least this 
device kept the man on his feet, 
doing some kind of useful work 
instead of rotting in a padded cell 
with a probably imaginary Bible. 
A man could cut his wrists with 
the edge of a sheet of paper if 
he tried long enough, so of course 
the Bible would be imaginary. 

But, Georgie, the waiter com- 
plained, you know you wont 
drink it You ask me to bring you 
drinks and then you just look at 
them. Boy, do you look funny 
when youre looking at drinks. 
Honest, Georgie, I want to laugh 
when I think of the way you 



look at a glass with a drink iij 
it. He did laugh. 

Price fumbled with the cig, 
arette stub in the black iron ash. 
tray, examining it with the skill 
of scientific observation. Mr. In- 
field is buying me the drink and 
that makes it different. 

Reggie went away. Price kept 
dissecting the tobacco and paper. 
Infield cleared his throat and 
again reminded himself against 
such obvious affectations. You 
were telling me about some or- 
ganization of the Cured, he said 
as a reminder. 

T3RICE looked up, no longer in- 
terested in the relic of a 
cigarette. He was suddenly in- 
tensely interested and intensely 
observant of the rest of the cafe. 
Was I? I was? Well, suppose you 
tell me something. What do you 
really think of the Incompletes? 
The psychiatrist felt his face 
frown. Who? 

I forgot. You havent been 
one of us long. The Incompletes 
is a truer name for the so-called 
Normals. Have you ever thought 
of just how dangerous these 
people are, Mr. Infield? 

Frankly, no, Infield said, re- 
alizing it was not the right thing 
to say but tiring of constant 
pretense. 

You dont understand. Every- 
one has some little phobia or 
fixation. Maybe everyone didnt 



36 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



have one once, but after being 
told they did have them for 
generations, everyone who didnt 
have one developed a defense 
mechanism and an aberration so 
they would be normal. If that 
phobia isnt brought to the sur- 
face and Cured, it may arise any 
time and endanger other people. 
The only safe, good sound citizens 
are Cured. Those lacking Cures 
the Incompletes  must be dealt 
with." 

Infields throat went dry. And 
youre the one to deal with them? 

Its my Destiny. Price quickly 
added, And yours, too, of course. 

Infield nodded. Price was a 
demagogue, young, handsome, dy- 
namic, likable, impassioned with 
his cause, and convinced that it 
was his divine destiny. He was 
a psychopathic egotist and a dan- 
gerous man. Doubly dangerous to 
Infield because, even though he 
was one of the few people who 
still read books from the old days 
of therapy to recognize Price for 
what he was, he nevertheless 
still liked the young man for the 
intelligence behind the egotism 
and the courage behind the fan- 
aticism. 

How are we going to deal with 
the Incompletes? Infield asked. 

Price started to glance around 
the cafe, then half-shrugged, al- 
most visibly thinking that he 
shouldnt run that routine into 
the ground. Well Cure them 



whether they want to be Cured 
or not  for their own good. 
Infield felt cold inside. After 
a time, he found that the roaring 
was not just in his head. It was 
thundering outside. He was get- 
ting sick. Price was the type of 
man who could spread his ideas 
throughout the ranks of the 
Cured  if indeed the plot was 
not already universal, imposed 
upon many ill minds. 

H e could picture an entire- 
ly Cured world and he did- 
nt like the view. Every Cure cut 
down on the mental and physical 
abilities of the patient as it was, 
whether Morgan and the others 
admitted it or not. But if every- 
one had a crutch to lean on for 
one phobia, he would develop 
secondary symptoms. 

People would start needing two 
Cures  perhaps a foetic gyro and 
a safety belt  then another and 
another. There would always be 
a crutch to lean on for one thing 
and then room enough to de- 
velop something else  until 
everyone would be loaded down 
with too many Cures to operate. 

A Cure was a last resort, dope 
for a malignancy case, euthanasia 
for the hopeless. Enforced Cures 
would be a curse for the individ- 
ual and the race. 

But Infield let himself relax. 
How could anyone force a me- 
chanical relief for neurotic or psy- 



NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



37 



chopathic symptoms on someone 
who didnt want or need it? 

Perhaps you dont see how it 
could be done, Price said. Ill 
explain. 

Reggies heavy hand sat a 
straight bourbon down before 
Price and another before Infield. 
Price stared at the drink almost 
without comprehension of how it 
came to be. He started to sweat. 

George, drink it. 

The voice belonged to a young 
woman, a blonde girl with pink 
skin and suave, draped clothes. 
In this den of the Cured, Infield 
thought half-humorously, it was 
surprising to see a Normal  an 
Incomplete. But then he noticed 
something about the baby she 
carried. The Cure had been very 
simple. It wasnt even a mechan- 
ized half-human robot, just a 
rag doll. She sat down at the table. 

George, she said, drink it. 
One drink wont raise your al- 
cohol index to the danger point. 
Youve got to get over this fear 
of even the sight or smell of li- 
quor. 

The girl turned to Infield. 
Youre one of us, but youre new, 
so you dont know about George. 
Maybe you can help if you do. 
Its all silly. Hes not an alcoholic. 
He didnt need to put that Cure 
on his head. Its just an excuse for 
not drinking. All of this is just 
because a while back something 
happened to the baby here   



she adjusted the dolls blanket 
 when he was drinking. Just 
drinking, not drunk. 

I dont remember what hap- 
pened to the baby  it wasnt im- 
portant. But George has been 
brooding about it ever since. I 
guess he thinks something else 
bad will happen because of li- 
quor. Thats silly. Why dont you 
tell him its silly? 

Maybe it is, Infield said 
softly. You could take the shock 
if he downed that drink and the 
shock might do you good. 

T>RICE laughed shortly. I feel 
like doing something very 
melodramatic, like throwing my 
drink  and yours  across the 
room, but I havent got the guts 
to touch those glasses. Do it for 
me, will you? Cauterizing the 
bite might do me good if Id been 
bitten by a rabid dog, but I dont 
have the nerve to do it. 

Before Infield could move, Reg- 
gie came and set both drinks on 
a little circular tray. He moved 
away. I knew it. Thats all he 
did, just look at the drink. Makes 
me laugh. 

Price wiped the sweat off his 
palms. Infield sat and thought. 
Mrs. Price cooed to the rag doll, 
unmindful of either of them now. 

You were explaining, the psy- 
chiatrist said. You were going to 
tell me how you were going to 
Cure the Incompletes. 



38 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



I said we were going to do it. 
Actually you will play a greater 
part than I, Doctor Infield. 

The psychiatrist sat rigidly. 
You didnt think you could 
give me your right name in front 
of your own office building and 
that I wouldnt recognize you? I 
know some psychiatrists are sen- 
sitive about wearing Cures them- 
selves, but it is a mark of honor 
of the completely sane man. You 
should be proud of your Cure and 
eager to Cure others. Very eager. 

Just what do you mean? He 
already suspected Prices mean- 
ing. 

Price leaned forward. There 
is one phobia that is so wide- 
spread, a Cure is not even thought 
of  hypochondria. Hundreds of 
people come to your office for a 
Cure and you turn them away. 
Suppose you and the other Cured 
psychiatrists give everybody who 
comes to you a Cure? 

Infield gestured vaguely. A 
psychiatrist wouldnt hand out 
Cures unless they were absolutely 
necessary. 

Youll feel differently after 
youve been Cured for a while 
yourself. Other psychiatrists 
have. 

Before Infield could speak, a 
stubble-faced, barrel-chested man 
moved past their table. He wore 
a safety belt. It was the man 
Price had called Davies, the one 
who had fastened one of his safe- 

NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



ty lines to Infield in the street. 

Davies went to the bar in the 
back. Gimme a bottle, he de- 
manded of a vacant-eyed Reg- 
gie. He came back toward them, 
carrying the bottle in one hand, 
brushing off rain drops with the 
other. He stopped beside Price 
and glared. Price leaned back. 
The chair creaked. Mrs. Price 
kept cooing to the doll. 

You made me fall, Davies ac- 
cused. 

Price shrugged. You were un- 
conscious. You never knew it. 

Sweat broke out on Davies 
forehead. You broke the Code. 
Dont you think I can imagine 
how it was to fall? You louse! 

S UDDENLY, Davies triggered 
his safety belt. At close range, 
before the lines could fan out in 
a radius, all the lines in front at- 
tached themselves to Price, the 
ones at each side clung to their 
table and the floor, and all the 
others to the table behind Infield. 
Davies released all lines except 
those on Price, and then threw 
himself backward, dragging Price 
out of his chair and onto the 
floor. Davies didnt mind making 
others fall. They were always try- 
ing to make him fall just so they 
could laugh at him or pounce on 
him; why shouldnt he like to 
make them fall first? 

Expertly, Davies moved for- 
ward and looped the loose lines 

39 



around Prices head and shoulders 
and then around his feet. He 
crouched beside Price and shoved 
the bottle into the gasping mouth 
and poured. 

Price twisted against the bind- 
ing lines in blind terror, gagging 
and spouting whiskey. Davies 
laughed and tilted the bottle 
more. 

Mrs. Price screamed. The 
Cure! If you get that much li- 
quor in his system, it will kill 
him! She rocked the rag doll in 
her arms, trying to soothe it, and 
stared in horror. 

Infield hit the big man behind 
the ear. He dropped the bottle 
and fell over sideways on the 
floor. Fear and hate mingled in 
his eyes as he looked up at In- 
field. 

Nonsense, Infield told himself. 
Eyes cant register emotion. 

Davies released his lines and 
drew them in. He got up pre- 
cariously. Im going to kill you, 
he said, glaring at Infield. You 
made me fall worse than Georgia 
did. Im really going to kill you. 

Infield wasnt a large man, but 
he had pressed two hundred and 
fifty many times in gym. He grab- 
bed Davies belt with both hands 
and lifted him about six inches 
off the floor. 

I could drop you, the psy- 
chiatrist said. 

No! Davies begged weakly. 
Please! 



Ill do it if you cause more 
trouble. Infield sat down and 
rubbed his aching forearms. 

IT^AVIES backed off in terror, 
right into the arms of Reg- 
gie. The waiter closed his huge 
hands on the acrophobes shoul- 
ders. 

You broke the Code all the 
way, Reggie said. The Good 
Book says Thou shouldnt kill 
or something like that, and so 
does the Code. 

Let him go, Reggie, Price 
choked out, getting to his feet. 
Im not dead. He wiped his 
hand across his mouth. 

No. No, you arent. Infield 
felt an excitement pounding 
through him, same as when he 
had diagnosed his first case. No, 
better than that. 

That taste of liquor didnt kill 
you. Price. Nothing terrible hap- 
pened. You could find some way 
to get rid of that Cure. 

Price stared at him as if he were 
a padded-cell case. Thats differ- 
ent. Id be a hopeless drunk with- 
out the Cure. Besides, no one ever 
gets rid of a Cure. 

They were all looking at In- 
field. Somehow he felt this rep- 
resented a critical point in his- 
tory. It was up to him which turn 
the world took, the world as rep- 
resented by these four Cured 
people. Im afraid Im for less 
Cures instead of more. Price. 



40 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Look, if I can show you that some- 
one can discard a Cure, would 
you get rid of that  if I may use 
word  monstrous thing on 

your head? 

Price grinned. Infield didnt rec- 
ognize its smugness at the time. 

Ill show you. He took off 
the circlet with the lightning rod 
and yanked at the wire running 
down into his collar. The new-old 
excitement within was running 
high. He felt the wire snap and 
come up easily. He threw the 
Cure on the floor. 

Now, he said, I am going 
out in that rain storm. Theres 
thunder and lightning out there. 
Im afraid, but I can get along 
without a Cure and so can you. 
You cant! Nobody can! 
Price screamed after him. He 
turned to the others. If he re- 
veals us, the Cause is lost. Weve 
got to stop him for good. Weve 
got to go after him. 

Its slippery, Davies whim- 
pered. I might fall. 

Mrs. Price cuddled her rag doll. 
I cant leave the baby and she 
mustnt get wet. 

Well, theres no liquor out 
there and you can study your text 
in the lightning flashes, Reggie. 
Come on. 

R unning down the streets 
that were tunnels of shining 
tar, running into the knifing ice 
bristles of the rain, Henry Infield 

NAME YOUR SYMPTOM 



realized that he was very fright- 
ened of the lightning. 

There is no action without a 
reason, he knew from the old neg- 
lected books. He had had a la- 
tent fear of lightning when he 
chose the lightning rod Cure. He 
could have picked a safety belt 
or foetic gyro just as well. 

He sneezed. He was soaked 
through, but he kept on running. 
He didnt know what Price and 
Reggie planned to do when they 
caught him. He slipped and fell. 
He would soon find out what they 
wanted. The excitement was all 
gone now and it left an empty 
space into which fear rushed. 

Reggie said, We shall make 
a sacrifice. 

Infield looked up and saw the 
lightning reflected on the blade 
of a thin knife. Infield reached 
toward it more in fascination than 
fear. He managed to get all his 
fingers around two of Reggies. 
He jerked and the knife fell into 
Infields palm. The psychiatrist 
pulled himself erect by holding 
to Reggies arm. Staggering to his 
feet, he remembered what he 
must do and slashed at the 
waiters head. A gash streaked 
across the mans brow and blood 
poured into his eyes. He screamed. 
I cant see the words! 

It was his problem. Infield 
usually solved other peoples 
problems, but now he ran away 
he couldnt even solve his own. 

41 



Infield realized that he had 
gone mad as he held the thin 
blade high overhead, but he did 
need some kind of lightning rod. 
Price (who was right behind him, 
gaining) had been right. No one 
could discard a Cure. He watched 
the lightning play its light on the 
blade of his Cure and he knew 
that Price was going to kill him 
in the next moment. 

He was wrong. 

The lightning hit him first. 

T> EGGIE squinted under the 
bandage at the lettering on 
the door that said INFIELD 8g 
MORGAN and opened the door. 
He ran across the room to the 
man sitting at the desk, reading 
by the swivel light. 

Mr. Morgan, your partner, Mr. 
Infield, he   

Just a moment. Morgan 
switched on the room lights. 
What were you saying? 

Mr. Infield went out without 
his Cure in a storm and was 
struck by lightning. We took him 



to the morgue. He must have 
been crazy to go out without his 
Cure. 

Morgan stared into his bright 
desk light without blinking. This 
is quite a shock to me. Would 
you mind leaving? Ill come over 
to your place and you can tell 
me about it later. 

Reggie went out. Yes, sir. He 
was struck by lightning, struck 
dead.-He must have been crazy 
to leave his Cure ... The door 
closed. 

Morgan exhaled. Poor Infield. 
But it wasnt the lightning that 
killed him, of course. Morgan ad- 
justed the soundproofing plugs in 
his ears, thinking that you did 
have to have quite a bit of light 
to read lips. The thunder, natur- 
ally, was what had killed Infield. 
Loud noise  any noise  that 
would do it every time. Too bad 
Infield had never really stopped 
being one of the Incompletes. 
Dangerous people. He would have 
to deal with them. 

 JIM HARMON 



NEVER, EVER BEFORE, ANYWHERE!! 

7000 fantasy and science-fiction books and back-issue 
mags at 50% to 90% under what* they've ever cost you 
before, here or anywhere, while they last! List free. 

WEREWOLF BOOKSHOP 
Shannon Rd., R.D. 2, Box 86F Verona, Penna. 



42 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




for your information 




By WILLY LEY 

WANTED - 

DEAD OR ALIVE 

T hough stories of sci- 
entific discoveries never 
repeat precisely, they of- 
ten have such a pronounced pat- 
tern that, in reading one story, 
one thinks that it is a retelling 
of another and it can happen 
that the mind is lulled into a 
kind of carelessness by the simi- 
larities and experiences a sur- 
prise when things suddenly take 
a different turn. As a case in 
point, I offer the stories of two 
scientific fishes. One event is 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



43 




rather old, having occurred in the 
period from 1870 to 1895. The 
other is recent, so recent that it 
is, in fact, still current 

The first story began with the 
fact that a man was tired of 
farming. He was William Forster, 
who had owned a farm near the 
Burnett River in Queensland, 
Australia, for a number of years, 
but had retired and moved to 
Sydney. One day in 1869, he de- 
cided to pass the time at the 
Sydney Museum. There he saw 
specimens of all the unusual ani- 
mals of Australia with which he 
was familiar. But there was some- 
thing missing and he fell to talk- 
ing about it with Gerard Krefft, 
the curator of the museum. Mr. 
Forster asked why the museum 
did not show the big fish that 
lived in the Burnett River. 

pERARD KREFFT admitted 
that he did not know any- 
thing about a big fish in the Bur- 
nett River, but thought it quite 
likely that the museum might 
have specimens  not yet on ex- 
hibit, possibly  from other lo- 
calities. He asked Forster to de- 
scribe it and Forster did his best. 

The fish was around five feet 
long and greenish in color, with 
a white belly, and had unusually 
large scales. It did not have a 
tail like other fish but more like 
an eel. Come to think of it, the 
shape of the body was alsp like 

44 



that of an eel, a very fat eel, 
about as thick as a mans thigh. 
And it had four strong fins. Mr. 
Forster was certain about that, 
even though Mr. Keffrt had nev- 
er heard about a fish with only 
four fins. 

Forster added that the fish was 
edible. The white squatters in 
the area actually called it the 
Burnett salmon, while the natives 
had a name like barramundi. (In 
that Mr. Forster was wrong. The 
natives did have a name for the 
fish he had in mind, but it was 
dyelleh. Barramundi was the na- 
tive name for an entirely differ- 
ent fish.) 

The discussion ended with a 
promise by Mr. Forster to write 
to his cousin, who had taken over 
the farm, and ask him to send a 
few Burnett salmon to Mr. Krefft. 

Early in 1870, a barrel arrived 
at the museum. It contained sev- 
eral Burnett salmon, strongly 
salted as a preservative against 
the heat of the southern-hemi- 
sphere summer. Curator Krefft 
pulled one of the specimens from 
the barrels and hefted it onto a 
table; the Burnett salmon proved 
to be a heavyweight. 

He saw that William Forster 
had delivered a rather good de- 
scription of the external charac- 
teristics. An expert would have 
done better only by attaching the 
proper technical terms to some 
of the external appendages. He 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



r 

would have called the pointed 
fringe of fin material around the 
rear end a Diphyceral Tail (pro- 
nounced with capitals out of re- 
spect for its rarity) and he would 
have emphasized that the four 
fins were living examples of an 
up to that moment only theoreti- 
cal concept, namely the archip- 
terygitim of Professor Karl Geg- 
enbauer. 

It was, in short, a limb which 
could evolve into a fishs fin or 
else could become an amphibians 
leg. 

Krefft then looked into the 
mouth of the creature and stated 
later that he did not believe his 
eyes. There were very few but 
very large teeth in this mouth, 
each one looking as if a set of 
teeth had grown together, and 
reminding the onlooker of the 
comb of a rooster. 

Such teeth had been known as 
fossils, but nobody had been 
quite sure which kind of early 
fish had grown them; general sus- 
picion centered around an an- 
cient shark. The extinct fish to 
which these teeth once belonged 
had been called Ceratodus, or 
horn-tooth. Now it was clear 
that it had not been a shark. 

When Krefft dissected the fish, 
he found that, in addition to the 
normal gills, it also had a sin- 
gle lung. It was the fish that 
got into all the books as the Aus- 
tralian Lungfish, a veritable liv- 

FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



ing fossil from the Middle Age 
of fish history. 

K refft was so over- 
whelmed by the find that 
he did not even think it proper 
to give it another scientific name 
than the one attached to the fos- 
sil. He called it Ceratodus For- 
steri, adding, as is customary, his 
own name. 

Since then, pretty complete 
specimens of the fossil Ceratodus 
have been found. It turned out 
that the fossils of several hundred 
million years ago and the living 
form were not quite the same, so 
the Latin word for new was 
tacked on in front of the name 
and it became Neoceratodus For- 
steri Krefft. 

What had to be done next was 
to investigate the living fossil in 
the living state. Two one-man ex- 
peditions set out for the Burnett 
River to do just that. One con- 
sisted of Professor Spencer of 
Melbourne, who just spent his 
vacation on the project. The other 
one was Professor Richard Semon 
of Jena, Germany, who had trav- 
eled half-way around the Earth 
for the purpose, backed by the 
money of the Swiss manufacturer 
Karl Ritter. 

Professor Semon, a direct pu- 
pil of Ernst Haeckel, was suc- 
cessful where Spencer was not, 
simply because Neoceratodus 
steadfastly refused to lay eggs 



45 



until after Professor Spencers 
vacation was over. But Professor 
Semons studies were interrupted, 
too, one day. No more eggs, no 
more fish within reach. The rea- 
son? The natives had eaten them! 

Professor Semon had to wait 
for a full year  ^which he spent 
on islands between Australia and 
New Zealand  until the mating 
time of Neocera f odus came round 
again. Then, with natives who 
had been very strongly warned 
against eating the fish, he offered 
what to them were enormous re- 
wards for bringing in the fish, and 
especially the eggs, alive. Ob- 
serving the development of an 
individual lungfish from its egg 
would shed much light on the 
evolution of the species in the 
past. 

It had been obvious all along 
that the lungfishes  there are 
three: one in South America, one 
in Africa and one in Australia, 
the Australian form being the 
largest and the most typical  
were somewhere near the point 
where, in the distant past, the 
marine vertebrates, the fishes, 
had gone on land to become am- 
phibians. But what had gone be- 
fore? Where did the lungfishes 
fit in with the other fishes? 

Mostly with the aid of fossils, 
the story could be reconstructed. 
The earliest known fishes, from 
the late Silurian and early De- 
vonian period of 350 million 



years ago, were a strange lot. 
They were small, just a few 
inches long. Their organ of loco- 
motion was their tail exclusively 
for there were no other fins. 
They also had no jaws and con- 
sequently no teeth. But they were 
heavily armored, with plate ar- 
mor in front and scales over the 
tail section. Their main and pos- 
sibly only enemy must have been 
the gigantic sea scorpions (eu- 
rypterids) of the same time, 
which were a good ten feet in 
length. No living representative 
of this type is left. 

l^UT SOME of these early 
fishes managed to become 
something else, presumably by 
leaving the river and going into 
the open sea. They developed 
jaws and paired fins and lost 
their armor, and speed became 
their protective device. We all 
know this type: the selachians, 
sharks in everyday English. 

That they were an inherently 
successful development is shown 
by the fact that they are still 
with us, although the bad repu- 
tation of a few of them has con- 
fused the picture. The number of 
surviving species of sharks (and 
of rays, which are also selachi- 
ans) is small and the number of 
individuals, too. Moreover, with 
a very few exceptions, the living 
forms are all rather recent types. 

Above the sharks, we get two 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



main lines. One of them consti- 
mtes the endless multitudes of 
tjje living true, or bony, fishes. 
Another line led through an in- 
termediary group to the first am- 
phibians; the lungfishes are a 
group which branched off this in- 
termediary group. They were 
near, but not in, the line of evo- 
lution of the amphibians and 
managed to survive mostly by 
being able to endure conditions 
which neither true fishes nor am- 
phibians could tolerate. 

The name of the intermediary 
group from which both the lung- 
fishes and the amphibians came 
is crossopterygians. In English, 
this is translated as lobe-fins. 
The Germans are more careful 
when it comes to the translation 
of the Greek word krossoi and 
call them QuastenfJosser or tas- 
sel-fins. An especially vigorously 
flourishing tribe of the lobe-fins 
were the coelacanths (hollow 
spines) with large heads, strong, 
almost limblike, fins and a curi- 
ous double tail. They started 
later in the Devonian period, 
lived through the Carboniferous 
and the Permian periods and all 
through the three periods of the 
great reptiles, Triassic, Jurassic 
and Cretaceous, but becoming 
rarer and rarer as time went on. 
They petered out near the end 
of the Cretaceous period and the 
last of the crossopterygians was 
Mactopotna Mantelli. 



It so happened that Macro- 
poma was the first fossil of a - 
crossopterygian ever discovered. 
Sir Arthur Smith Woodward 
carefully reconstructed it. 

M y second fish story begins 
by reporting that a river 
called Chalumna empties into 
the ocean on the southeast coast 
of Africa, near a town called East 
London. Late in 1938, a trawler 
with a load of fish berthed in 
New London. Its captain phoned 
the curator of the local museum, 
Miss M. Courtnay Latimer, told 
her that he had caught a very 
curious fish, and maybe she 
would like to come to the wharf 
to look at it. Miss Latimer did 
and saw at first glance that, what- 
ever it was, it was very curious, 
just as the captain had said. 

There was an unwieldy fish 
with an enormous head, steel 
blue in color, with large blue 
eyes, large scales and peculiar 
fins. It was a little over five feet 
in length and, though the captain 
of the trawler did not know its 
name, he did know its weight: 
127 pounds. He also remembered 
details of the catch. 

It had been caught not very 
far offshore on December 22nd, 
1938, with a trawler net  other 
contents: one and a half tons of 
shark and half a ton of redfish 
and kobs  in 40 fathoms of wa- 
ter. It had lived for three hours 



46 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



47 



after capture and had tried to 
bite the hand of the captain as 
he bent over to see whether it 
was alive. 

The trawler captain had 
termed it a very curious fish. 
Miss Latimer spoke of it as a 
very primitive fish when she in- 
formed Dr. James Leonard Bri- 
erley Smith, ichthyologist at 
Rhodes University, Grahams- 
town. South Africa. 

Dr. Smith hurried to East Lon- 
don, but meanwhile nature had 
taken its course. The trawler had 
not returned to shore immedi- 
ately after this catch. Miss Lati- 
mer probably wrote at once, but 
time went by between her first 
look at the fish and Dr. Smiths 
arrival. And it was summer in 
the southern hemisphere. Miss 
Latimer had been forced to order 
the fish skinned and the skin 
mounted. She did save the skull, 
too, and the rest had to be thrown 
away. 

But although all the internal 
and interesting parts were miss- 
ing, Dr. Smith saw that it was a 
coelacanthl 

To honor Miss Latimer, who 
had saved what could be saved, 
he called it Latimeria and wrote 
down, for the journal The Cape 
Naturalist, the precise classifica- 
tion: Class: Pisces; Subclass:' 

Crossopterygii; Order: Actinis- 

tia; Family: Coelacanthidae; Ge- 
nus: Latimeria; Species: chalum- 

48 



nae, and added: the genus and 
the species are new to science. 

This was one of those major 
understatements which are occa- 
sionally made by people who 
want to avoid being called en- 
thusiastic, for it was the biggest 
discovery in the whole natural 
history field since the finding of 
Neoceratodus. 

A live brontosaurus in Lake 
Victoria would have been more 
spectacular, of course, but of 
lesser scientific interest. It cer- 
tainly would have involved us, 
the observers, less because Lati- 
meria chalumnae J. L. B. Smith 
is a representative of what con- 
stituted our own ancestry and a 
brontosaurus is not. 

T>UT THEN came a period of 
long frustration, for the Sec- 
ond World War was on. Fishing 
for food continued as usual, but 
the specimen off the mouth of 
the Chalumna River was evident- 
ly a stray. 

It is said that Dr. Smith, dur- 
ing the war years, asked his wife 
in the middle of the night, Do 
you think Latimeria lives in the 
Mozambique Channel? (the wa- 
ter separating Madagascar from 
Africa) and I, for one, am in- 
clined to believe this story; I 
have done similar things myself. 
Life would have been much eas- 
ier for Dr. Smith if he had known 
where Latimeria lived. Since he 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




Area of distribution of the living eoeloeanths, the sea between 
the mainland of Africa and the northern tip of Madagascar. 



didnt, he had to consider an 
enormous area. 

The three languages spoken on 
the coastline of Africa are, going 
from south to north: English, 
Portuguese and French. Dr. 
Smith had pamphlets printed in 
large numbers in these three lan- 
guages, offering a reward of 100 
for a specimen. 

He made collecting trips him- 
self and, in December, 1952, had 
just come to Durban Harbor, 

FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



South Africa, with many speci- 
mens of other fish, when he re- 
ceived a message from a trader 
plying the ocean between the 
African mainland and the Como- 
res Islands: Grande Comore, Mo- 
heli, Anjouan and Mayotte. Trad- 
er Eric Hunt reported that he 
had a second specimen! 

Dr. Smith, worried that it 
might decay like the first before 
he got there, telephoned Daniel 
F. Malan, the Prime Minister of 

49 




1 



The living coelacanth, Latimeria Chalumnae Smith. 



the Union of South Africa, plead- 
ing for an airplane and pilot. 

Prime Minister Malan is a 
champipn of Apaartheid (segre- 
gation) and thinks that evolution 
IS a question of belief instead of 
knowledge. Moreover, the tele- 
phone call arrived at midnight, 
when he was asleep. 

In spite of all this. Dr. Smith 
won his point the Prime Min- 
ister ordered at once that a Da- 
kota plane (DC-3) and a mili- 
tary pilot be placed at Dr. Smiths 
disposition. He was flown to 
Trader Hunts ship. High emo- 
tional strain and lack of sleep 
combined to put Dr. Smiths 
nerves on edge;' when he saw the 
wrapped fish on board the small 
ship, he had to ask others to re- 
move the wrappings for him. 
There was a large blue coela- 
canth with large blue eyes, with 
catlike teeth in its jaws  and it 



was undecayed! 

Dr. Smith knelt down on the 
deck and wept. 

CPECIMEN NO. 2 had been 
caught by a native, Ahmed 
Hussein, 200 yards off the island 
of Anjouan in 65 feet of water. 
The fish had struggled so hard 
that Ahmed Hussein had to bash 
Its head in. The next morning, he 
took It to market, but before 
somebody else of equal ignorance 
bought It for soup, another native 
recognized it as the fish which 
was worth three years of normal 
income. The lucky fisherman and 
his canny informant lugged the 
fish over 25 miles of mountainous 
terrain to Trader Hunts vessel. 

Hunt, who had been handing 
out Dr. Smiths leaflets himself, 
sent a cable to the scientist, then 
sliced open the fishs sides and 
packed them with salt. After that. 



50 



galaxy science fiction 




The most recent fossil coelacanth, restoration of skeleton 
(above) and of external appearance (below). The restora- 
tions were made before the living coelacanth was discovered. 



he found a medical officer, bor- 
rowed a S37ringe and five liters of 
formalin and injected them into 
the fish. 

Dr. Smith now had the mate- 
rial to decide the two questions 
most important from the scien- 
tific standpoint: How were the 

FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



jaws formed? And had the coel- 
acanths progressed to the point of 
having livers? 

En passant, he collected some 
information from the natives of 
the Comores Islands. They all 
knew the fish, which was brought 
to market occasionally. Their 

51 




own name for it was combessa. 
Its flesh turned into jelly when it 
was boiled. And, when alive, its 
eyes were luminous. 

After examining Specimen No. 
2 some more. Dr. Smith felt that 
this was a different species from 
No. 1. And so it happened that 
the anti-evolutionist Prime Min- 
ister had this fish named after 
him  it became Malania an- 
jouanae, Malans fish from An- 
jouan. 

Science did not have to wait 
for another dozen years for Spe- 
cimen No. 3. It was killed by 
Houmadi Hassani off Anjouan 
in 650 feet of water on Septem- 
ber 24, 1953. It was a smaller 
fish, weighing only 88 pounds, 
and it was brown with white 
spots. Because of this coloration, 
Houmadi Hassanis assertion that 
he had the fish was not believed 
at first, but a few hours after 
death, it turned blue. 

It was flown in an old Junkers 
plane to Madagascar, for in the 
meantime. Professor James Mil- 
lot in Paris had informed French 
officialdom about the scientific 
rarity in French waters, since 
both the Comores and Madagas- 
car are French possessions. In 
fact. Professor Millot was wait- 
ing in Madagascar; he was not 
going to miss a chance to have a 
go at the next specimen that 
showed up. And he soon made a 
few scientific pronouncements. 



The coelacanth apparently 
showed a very unusual amount 
of individual variation, in colora- 
tion as well as in placements of 
the fins. Hence Dr. Smiths new 
species, based on such minor dif. 
ferences, was unfounded. They 
were all Latimeria chalumnae. 

Specimen No. 4 was taken near 
Grande Comore, the main island 
of the group, on January 29, 
1954. In the morning of January 
30th, Specimen No. 5 was 
brought in and, a few hours later. 
Specimen No. 6. But there was 
a wait of ten months for No. 7. 

The scientists, especially the 
French, were overjoyed with the 
development, but they mourned 
one fact. One couldnt be sure 
about the very first specimen be- 
cause so little of it was left, but 
all the others had been males. 

A S IN the case of Neoceratodus, 
the scientific desire for iish 
eggs grew to outrageous propor- 
tions. Furthermore, six good spec- 
imens were enough to learn all 
about the anatomy of this sur- 
vivor from the period preceding 
the so-called Age of Reptiles. 
Now one had to observe the live 
fish if one wanted more informa- 
tion. 

The French had matched Dr. 
Smiths reward of one hundred 
pounds sterling all along and had 
paid it to the lucky fishermen  
with public ceremonies. Now 



doubled the prize, but it 
jiad to be a live specimen to rate 

the bigger award. ^ ^ 

gpecinien No. 8 was brought 
in on November 12, 1954, by two 
fishermen, Zema ben Said Mo- 
hamed and Madi Bacari. The fish 
struck at a depth of 840 feet and 
it took more than half an hour 
to haul it in. Specimen No. 8 was 



to be a female. 

There was dancing all night in 
the village. The specimen was 
put in a swamped boat resting 
on the bottom in very shallow 
water and a fish net was stretched 
over the boat so that the catch 
could not escape. And anybody 
could see that the natives had 
told the truth all along: the eyes 
of the fish glowed strongly with 
a greenish-yellow light. The color 
of the live specimen was a very 
dark gray-blue. As it swam slowly 
about in its confined space, the 
pectoral fins made curious ro- 
tating movements, to use Pro- 



fessor Millots words. 

Millot continued: . the sec- 
ond dorsal and anal fins, likewise 
very mobile, served together with 
the tail as a rudder. After day- 
break it became apparent that 
the light, and above all the sun 
itself, was upsetting the animal 
very much, so several tent can- 
vases were put over the boat to 
serve as some kind of protection. 
But despite this precaution and 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



the more or less constant renewal 
of the water, the fish began to 
show more and more obvious 
signs of distress, seeking to con- 
ceal itself in the darkest corners 
... at 14:45 hr. it was still swim- 
ming feebly; but at 15:30 hr. it 
had its belly in the air and only 
the fins and gill covers were mak- 
ing agonized movements. 

Specimen No. 8, four feet and 
nearly eight inches long and 
weighing almost precisely 90 
pounds, had lived for about 20 
hours, counting from the moment 
of its striking the baited hook. 
Unfortunately, the fish did not 
carry any eggs. But quoting Mil- 
lot once more: 

Two principal conclusions 
emerge from the corroborated 
statements made by local observ- 
ers and myself: (1) the extreme 
photophobia of Latimeria  the 
sunlight seemed literally to hi^ 
it; (2) the exceptional mobility 
of the pecundulate fins, correlated 
with the wealth of musculature 
which is revealed by anatomical 
studies. The pectorals, in particu- 
lar, can move in almost any direc- 
tion and show themselves capable 
of assuming practically every 
conceivable position. 

B ecause of the sensitivity 
to sunlight, an aquarium 
for Latimeria will probably have 
to take the shape of a wire-net 
cage at the bottom of the sea. 



52 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



53 



at least 200 feet below the sur- 
face, which can be lifted to, say, 
30 feet from time to time to 
enable scientists in aqualungs to 
study the fish and take photo- 
graphs. 

Professor Millot has promised 
that all about Latimeria will be 
told in a foxir-volume work now 
in preparation. But the last vol- 
ume of this work will certainly 
not be sent to the printer until 
a few more things have been 
done. 

One is to observe mating and 
spawning, if at all possible. If 
that does not work out, the scien- 
tists want to have at least one 
bunch of eggs which can be 
hatched and a few yoimg will 
then be killed off for careful dis- 
section at intervals of a few days. 
Richard Semon did that with 
Neoceratodus eggs. 

The comparison between the 
two should be most interesting 
and enlightening. Since the young 
in their early stages always re- 
semble their ancestors, such a 
study may teach us just where 
Latimeria ties in with fossil forms 
and possibly even enable us to 
arrange the fossil forms in an evo- 
lutionary sequence. 

Another observation that 
would be of the greatest interest 
would be to find where the fish 
actually lives. The first specimen 
was evidently a stray, because 
all the others were taken in the 



vicinity of the Comores Islands 
 usually, but not always, in 
fairly deep water. If one could 
establish where the fish lives, it 
could be a clue for its survival in 
just this area. If they prefer caves 
it might also be that the biggest 
specimen stay in their caves. 

The first one, weighing 127 
poimds, is also the largest one so 
far. Most of the others weighed 
100 pounds or less. But the na- 
tives swear that in the past, when 
nobody yet cared, specimens 
weighing 225 pounds were 
brought to market once in a while. 

Finally, it is not established 
that the fish lives only near the 
Comores Islands. It has not yet 
been fotmd near the Cosmoledo 
Islands, or near the Seychelles 
Islands, some distance to the 
northeast from the Cosmoledos. 
On the other hand, nobody has 
been strenuously looking around 
these islands and we have seen 
that, in spite of strenuous looking, 
many years passed between Spec- 
imen No. 1 and No. 2. 

Moreover, such living fossils 
have a habit of surviving in 
widely separated areas, a fact 
that can be easily explained. 
Originally they had a worldwide 
distribution and then managed to 
hang on in a few places, becoming 
extinct in the in-between areas. 

Marsupials, for example, sur- 
vived mainly in Australia. But 
they also live in the Americas. 



54 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



k NOTHER LIVING fossil, just 
iV as old as Latimeria and Neo~ 
ceratodas, the horseshoe crab sur- 
vives along the Atlantic shores 
of the United States. The only 
other place it can be found is in 
the waters around the Moluccas 
on the other side of the Earth. 
The point Fm leading up to is 
that there is a little bit of very 
feeble evidence for a primitive 
fish of large size in the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

In 1949, a woman in or near 
Tampa, Florida, ran a small shop 
selling souvenirs to tourists. She 
made many of them herself and 
her raw material consisted often 
of fish scales, which she bought 
from local fishermen. One day in 
1949, a fisherman sold her a gal- 
lon can full of scales. They had 
the same size as the scales of a 
large tarpon  about that of a sil- 
ver dollar  but they looked dif- 
ferent. 

Being curious, she mailed one 
of the scales to the National Mu- 
seum in Washington, D. C., where 
it was passed on to the fish expert. 
Dr. Isaac Ginsburg. Dr. Ginsburg 
knew several things instantly: 

One: he had never seen such a 
scale before. Two: no fish with 
such scales was known to live in 
the Gulf of Mexico. Three: there 
had never been even a rumor of 
a large unknown fish from those 
waters. Finally: the fish which 
grew this scale was a very primi- 



tive type, possibly a crossoptery- 
gian. 

He at once wrote to Tampa re- 
questing information on the 
whereabouts of more scales, the 
place where the fisherman had 
been fishing, the appearance of 
the fish from which the scales 
were taken. He never received 
a reply. 

Nothing is known, therefore, 
except that there must be some- 
thing unusual in the Gulf. We 
may get still a third fish story of 
the type of the two just told, right 
in our own waters. 

 WILLY LEY 



Current ISew Books: 

Science & Fantasy 
Fiction 

 We carry a full line of all cur- 
rent American science fiction, as 
well as a large stock of scarce 
out-of-print books in this field. 
Back issues of science fiction 
magazines available. 

STEPHEN'S BOOK SERVICE 
71 THIRD AVENUE 
(Bet. Ilth B 12th Streett) 

New York 3, New York 

Open Monday Thru Saturday 
9:.T0 A. M. to 6:00 P. M. 

(Phone GRomercy 3-5990) 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



55 






A Coffin for 



Jacob 



With never o moment to rostf tho pursuit 
through space felt like a game of hounds 
and hares ... or was it follow the leader? 



By EDWARD W. LUDWIG 
Illustrated by EMSH 




B en CURTIS eased his 
pale, gaunt body through 
the open doorway of the 
Blast Inn, the dead man follow- 
ing silently behind him. 

His fear-borne gaze traveled 
into the dimly illumined Venu- 
sian gin mill. The place was like 
an evil caldron steaming with a 
brew whose ingredients had been 
culled from the back corners of 
three planets. 

Most of the big room lay ob- 
scured behind a shimmering veil 
of tobacco smoke and the sweet, 
heavy fumes of Martian Devils 
Egg. Here and there, Ben saw 
moving figures. He could not tell 
if they were Earthmen, Martians 
or Venusians. 

Someone tugged at his greasy 
coat. He jumped, thinking ab- 
surdly that it was the dead mans 
hand. 

Coma esta, senor? a small 






A COFFIN FOR JACOB 






56 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



57 



voice piped. Speken die 
Deutsch? Desirez-vous damoui? 
Da? Nyet? 

Ben looked down. 

The speaker was an eager-eyed 
Martian boy of about ten. He was 
like a red-skinned marionette 
with pipestem arms and legs, clad 
in a torn skivvy shirt and faded 
blue dungarees. 

Im American, Ben muttered. 

Ah, buena! I speak English 
ires fine, senor. I have Martian 
friend, she tres pretty and tres 
fat. She weigh almost eighty 
pounds, monsieur. I take you to 
her, si? 

Ben shook his head. 

TTE THOUGHT, I dont want 
your Martian wench. I dont 
want your opium or your Devils 
Egg or your Venusian kali. But if 
you had a drug thafd bring a 
dead man to life, Id buy and pay 
with my soul. 

It is deal, monsieur? Five dol- 
lars or twenty keelis for visit 
Martian friend. Maybe you like 
House of Dreams. For House of 
Dreams   

Im not buying. 

The dirty-faced kid shrugged. 
Then I show you to good table, 
 tres bien. I do not charge you, 
senor. 

The boy grabbed his hand. Be- 
cause Ben could think of no rea- 
son for resisting, he followed. 
They plunged into shifting layers 



of smoke and through the drone 
of alcohol-cracked voices. 

They passed the bar with its 
line of lean-featured, slit-eyed 
Earthmen  merchant space- 
men. 

They wormed down a nar- 
row aisle flanked by booths 
carved from Venusian marble 
that jutted up into the semi-dark- 
ness like fog-blanketed tomb- 
stones. 

Several times, Ben glimpsed 
the bulky figures of CO^-breath- 
ing Venusians, the first hed ever 
seen. 

They were smoky gray, scaly, 
naked giants, toads in human 
shape. They stood solitary and 
motionless, aloof, their green- 
lidded eyes unblinking. They cer- 
tainly didnt look like telepaths, 
as Ben had heard they were, but 
the thought sent a fresh rivulet of 
fear down hisspine. 

Once he spied a white-uni- 
formed officer of Hoover Citys 
Security Police. The man was 
striding down an aisle, idly tap>- 
ping his neuro-club against the 
stone booths. 

Keep walking, Ben told him- 
self. You look the same as anyone 
else here. Keep walking. Look 
straight ahead. 

The officer passed. Ben 
breathed easier. 

Here we are, monsieur piped 
the Martian boy. A tres fine 
table. Close in the shadows. 



58 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Ben winced. How did this kid 
know he wanted to sit in the 
shadows? Frowning, he sat down 
he and the dead man. 

He listened to the lonely 
rhythms of the four-piece Mar- 
tian orchestra. 

The Martians were fragile, 
doll-like creatures with heads too 
large for their spindly bodies. 
Their long fingers played upon 
the strings of their cirillas or 
crawled over the holes of their 
flutes like spider legs. Their tune 
was sad. Even when they played 
an Earth tune, it still seemed a 
song of old Mars, charged with 
echoes of lost voices and forgot- 
ten grandeur. 

For an instant, Bens mind rose 
above the haunting vision of the 
dead man. He thought. What are 
they doing here, these Martians? 
Here, in a smoke-filled room 
under a metalite dome on a dust- 
covered world? Couldnt they 
have played their music on Mats? 
Or had they^like me, felt the chal- 
lenge of new worlds? 

He sobered. It didnt matter. 
He ordered a whiskey from a 
Chinese waiter. He wet his lips 
but did not drink. His gaze wan- 
dered over the faces of the Inns 
other occupants. 

youve got to find him, he 
thought, youve got to find the 
man with the red beard. Its the 
only way you can escape the dead 
man. 



T he dead man was real. His 
name was Cobb. He was stout 
and flabby and about forty and 
he hated spacemen. 

His body was buried now  
probably in the silent gray wastes 
outside Luna City. But hed be- 
come a kind of invisible Siamese 
twin, as much a part of Ben as 
sight in his eyes. 

Sometimes the image would be 
shuffling dnmkenly beside him, 
its lips spitting whiskey-slurred 
curses. 

Again, its face would be a 
pop-eyed mask of surprise as 
Bens fist thudded into its jaw. 
More often, the face would be 
frozen in the whiteness of death. 
The large eyes would stare. Blood 
would trickle from a corner of 
the gaping mouth. 

You can forget a living man. 
You can defeat him or submit to 
him or ignore him, and the matter 
is over and done. You cant es- 
cape from a memory that has 
burned into your mind. 

It had begun a week ago in 
Luna City. The flight from White 
Sands had been successful. Ben, 
quietly and moderately, wanted 
to celebrate. He stopped alone in 
a rocketfront bar for a beer. The 
man named Cobb plopped his 
portly and unsteady posterior on 
the stool next to him. 

Spacemen, he muttered, are 
getting like flies. Ever5rwhere, all 
you sees spacemen. 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



59 



He was a neatly dressed ci- 
vilian. 

Ben smiled. If it werent for 
spacemen, you wouldnt be here. 

The names Cobb. The man 
hiccoughed. Spacemen in their 
white monkey suits. They think 
theyre little tin gods. Betcha you 
think youre a little tin god. He 
downed a shot of whiskey. 

Ben stiffened. He was twenty- 
four and dressed in the white, 
crimson-braided uniform of the 
Odysseys junior astrogation offi- 
cer. He was three months out of 
the Academy at White Sands and 
the shining uniform was like a 
key to all the mysteries of the 
Universe. 

Hed sought long for that key. 

AT THE age of five  perhaps 
in order to dull the memory 
of his parents death in a recent 
strato-jet crash  hed spent 
hours watching the night sky for 
streaking flame-tails of Moon 
rockets. At ten, hed ground his 
first telescope. At fourteen, hed 
converted an abandoned shed on 
the government boarding-school 
grounds to a retreat which housed 
his collection of astronomy and 
rocketry books. 

At sixteen, hed spent every 
weekend holiday hitchhiking 
from Boys Town No. 5 in the 
Catskills to Long Island Space- 
port. There, among the grizzled 
veterans of the old Moon Patrol, 



hed found friend^ who under- 
stood his dream and who later 
recommended his appointment to 
the U. S. Academy for the Con- 
quest of Space. 

And a month ago, hed signed 
aboard the Odyssey  the first 
ship, it was rumored, equipped to 
venture as far as the asteroids 
and perhaps beyond. 

Cobb was persistent: Damn 
fools shoulda known enough to 
stay on Earth. What the hell good 
is it, jumpin from planet to 
planet? 

The guys drunk, Ben thought. 
He took his drink and moved 
three stools down the bar. 

Cobb followed. You dont like 
the truth, eh, kid? You dont 
like people to call you a sucker. 

Ben rose and started to leave 
the bar, but Cobb grabbed his 
arm and held him there. 

Thas what you are  a sucker. 
Youre young now. Wait ten 
years. Youll be dyin of radiation 
rot or a meteorll get you. Wait 
and see, sucker! 

Until this instant, Ben had sup- 
pressed his anger. Now, suddenly 
and without warning, it welled up 
into savage fury. 

His fist struck the man on the 
chin. Cobbs eyes gaped in 
shocked horror. He spun back- 
ward. His head cracked sicken- 
ingly on the edge of the bar. The 
sound was like a punctuation 
mark signaling the end of life. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



He sank to the floor, eyes 
glassy, blood tricking down his 
jaw. 

Ben knew that he was dead. 
Then, for a single absurd sec- 
ond, Ben was seized with terror 

just as, a moment before, hed 

been overwhelmed with anger. 

He ran. 

F or some twenty minutes, he 
raced through a dizzying, 
nightmare world of dark rocket- 
front alleys and shouting voices 
and pursuing feet. 

At last, abruptly, he realized 
that he was alone and in silence. 
He saw that he was still on the 
rocketfront, but in the Tycho- 
ward side of the city. 

He huddled in a dark corner 
of a loading platform and lit a 
cigarette. A thousand stars  a 
thousand motionless balls of sil- 
ver fire  shone above him 
through Luna Cit^s transparent 
dome. 

He was sorry hed hit Cobb, of 
course. He was not sorry hed run. 
Escaping at least gave him a 
power of choice, of decision. 

You can do two things, he 
thought. 

You can give yourself up, and 
thats what a good officer would 
do. That would eliminate the es- 
cape charge. Yot^d get off with 
voluntary manslaughter. Under 
interplanetary law, that would 
mean ten years in prison and a 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



dishonorable discharge. And then 
yot/d be free. 

But yot/d be through with 
rockets and space. They dont 
want new men aver thirty-four 
for officers on rockets or even for 
third-class jet-men on beat-up 
freighters  they dont want con- 
victed killers. You'd get the rest 
of the thrill of conquering space 
through video and by peeking 
through electric fences of space- 
ports. 

Or  

There were old wives tales of 
a group of renegade spacemen 
who operated from the Solar Sys- 
tems frontiers. The spacemen 
werent outlaws. They were mis- 
fits, rejectees from the clearing 
houses on Earth. 

And whereas no legally recog- 
nized ship had ventured past 
Mars, the souped-up renegade 
rigs had supposedly hit the as- 
teroids. Their headquarters was 
Venus. Their leader  a subject 
of popular and fantastic conjec- 
ture in the mens audiozines  
wash rumored to be a red- 
bearded giant. 

So, Ben reflected, you can take 
a beer-and-pretzels tale seriously. 
You can hide for a couple of 
days, get rid of your uniform, 
change your name. You can wait 
for a chance to get to Venus. To 
hell with your duty. You can try 
to stay in space, even if you exile 
yourself from Earth. 



60 



61 



After all, was it right for a sin- 
gle second, a single insignificant 
second, to destroy a mans life 
and his dream? 

TTE WAS lucky. He found a 
tramp freighter whose skip- 
per was on his last flight before 
retirement. Discipline was lax, in- 
vestigation of new personnel even 
more so. 

Ben Curtis made it to Venus. 

There was just one flaw in his 
decision. He hadnt realized that 
the memory of the dead mans 
face would haunt him, torment 
him, follow him as constantly as 
breath flowed into his lungs. 

But might not the rumble of 
atomic engines drown the mur- 
muring dead voice? Might not 
the vision of alien worlds and in- 
finite spaceways obscure the dead 
face? 

So now he sat searching for a 
perhaps nonexistent red-bearded 
giant, and hoping and doubting 
and fearing, all at once. 

"You look for someone, senor? 

He jumped. Oh. You still 
here? 

Oui" The Martian kid 
grinned, his mouth full of purple 
teeth. "I keep you company on 
your first night in Hoover City, 
nest-ce-pas? 

This isnt my first night here, 
Ben lied. Ive been around a 
while. 

You are spacemen? 



Ben threw a fifty-cent credit 
piece on the table. Here. Take 
off, will you? 

Spiderlike fingers swept down 
upon the coin. Ich danke, senor. 
You know why city is called 
Hoover City? 

Ben didnt answer. 

They say it is because after 
women come, they want first 
thing a thousand vacuum clean- 
ers for dust. What is vacuum 
cleaner, monsieur? 

Ben raised his hand as if to 
strike the boy. 

Ai-yee, I go. You keep listen 
to good Martian music. 

The toothpick of a body 
melted into the semi-darkness. 

Minutes passed. There were 
two more whiskeys. A ceaseless 
parade of faces broke through the 
smoky veil that enclosed him  
reddish balloon faces, scaly rep- 
tilian faces, white-skinned, slit- 
eyed faces, and occasionally a 
white, rouged, powdered face. But 
nowhere was there a face with a 
red beard. 

A sense of hopelessness gripped 
Ben Curtis. Hoover City was but 
one of a dozen cities of Venus. 
Each had twenty dives such as 
this. 

He needed help. 

But his picture must have been 
scoped to Venusian visiscreens. A 
reward must have been offered 
for his capture. Whom could he 
trust? The Martian kid, perhaps? 



62 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Far down the darkened aisle 
nearest him, his eyes caught a 
flash of white. He tensed. 

Like the uniform of a Security 
Policeman, he thought. 

His gaze shifted to another aisle 
and another hint of whiteness. 

And then he saw another and 
another and another. 

Each whiteness became 
brighter and closer, like shrinking 
spokes of a wheel with Ben as 
their focal point. 

You idiot! The damned Mar- 
tian kid! You should have knovm! 

L ight showered the room 

in a dazzling explosion. Ben, 
half blinded, realized that a broad 
circle of unshaded globes in the 
ceiling had been turned on. 

The light washed away the 
rooms strangeness and its air of 
brooding wickedness, revealing 
drab concrete walls and a debris- 
strewn floor. 

Eyes blinked and squinted. There 
were swift, frightened movements 
and a chorus of angry murmurs. 
The patrons of the Blast Inn were 
like tatter-clad occupants of a 
house whose walls have been 
ripped away. 

Ben Curtis twisted his lean 
body erect. His chair tumbled 
backward, falling. 

The white-clad men charged, 
neuro-clubs upraised. 

A woman screamed. The music 
ceased. The Martian orchestra 



slunk with feline stealth to a rear 
exit. Only the giant Venusians 
remained undisturbed. They 
stood unmoving, their staring 
eyes shifting lazily in Bens di- 
rection. 

Curtis! one of the policemen 
yelled. Youre covered! Hold it! 

Ben whirled away from the ad- 
vancing police, made for the exit 
into which the musicians had dis- 
appeared. 

A hissing sound traveled past 
his left ear, a sound like com- 
pressed air escaping from a con- 
tainer. A dime-sized section of 
the concrete wall ahead of him 
crumbled. 

He stumbled forward. They 
were using deadly neuro-pistols 
now, not the mildly stunning 
neuro-clubs. 

Another hiss passed his cheek. 
He was about twelve feet from 
the exit. Another second, his brain 
screamed. Just another second 

Or would the exits be guarded? 

He heard the hiss. 

It hit directly in the small of 
his back. There was no pain, just 
a slight pricking sensation, like 
the shallow jab of a needle. 

H e froze as if yanked to a 
stop by a noose. His body 
seemed to be growing, swelling 
into balloon proportions. He 
knew that the tiny needle had 
imbedded itself deep in his flesh, 
knew that the paralyzing morto- 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



63 



Cain was spreading like icy fire 
into every fiber and muscle of his 
body. 

He staggered like a man of 
stone moving in slow motion. 
Hed have fifteen  maybe 
twenty  seconds before com- 
plete lethargy of mind and body 
overpowered him. 

In the dark world beyond his 
fading consciousness, he heard a 
voice yell, Turn on the damn 
lights! 

Then a pressure and a coldness 
were on his left hand. He realized 
that someone had seized it. 

A soft feminine voice spoke to 
him. Youre wounded? They hit 
you? 

Yes. His thick lips wouldnt 
let go of the word. 

You want to escape  even 
now? 

Yes. 

You may die if you dont give 
yourself up. 

No, no. 

He tried to stumble toward the 
exit. 

All right then. Not that way. 
Here, this way. 

Heavy footsteps thudded 
toward them. A few yards away, 
a flashlight flicked on. 

Hands were guiding him. He 
was aware of being pushed and 
pulled. A door closed behind him. 
The glare of the flashlight faded 
from his vision  if he still had 
vision. 



Youre sure? the voice per- 
sisted. 

Im sure, Ben managed to 
say. 

I have no antidote. You may 
die. 

His mind fought to compre- 
hend. With the anti-paralysis in- 
jection, njassage and rest, a man 
could recover from the effects of 
mortocain within half a day. 
Without treatment, the paralysis 
could spread to heart and lungs. 
It could become a paralysis of 
death. An effective weapon: the 
slightest wound compelled the 
average criminal to surrender at 
once. 

Anti . anti . . The words 
were as heavy as blobs of mer- 
cury forced from his throat. No 
. Im sure . sure. 

He didnt hear the answer or 
anything else. 



DEN CURTIS had no precise 
sensation of awakening. Re- 
turn to consciousness was an in- 
tangible evolution from a world 
of black nothingness to a dream- 
like state of awareness. 

He felt the pressure of hands 
on his naked arms and shoulders, 
hands that massaged, manipu- 
lated, fought to restore circulation 
and sensitivity. He knew they 
were strong hands. Their strength 
seemed to transfer itself to his 
own body. 

For a long time, he tried to 



64 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



open his eyes. His lids felt welded 
shut But after a while, they 
opened. His world of darkness 
gave way to a translucent cloak 
of mist A round, featureless 
shape hovered constantly above 
 a face, he supposed. 

He tried to talk. Although his 
lips moved slightly, the only 
sound was a deep, staccato grunt- 
ing. 

But he heard someone say, 
Dont try to talk. It was the 
same gentle voice hed heard in 
the Blast Inn. Dont talk. Just 
lie still and rest. Everythingll be 
all right 

Everything all right, he 
thought dimly. 

There were long periods of 
lethargy when he was aware of 
nothing. There were periods of 
light and of darkness. Gradually 
he grew aware of things. He real- 
ized that the soft rubber mouth of 
a spacemans oxygen mask was 
clamped over his nose. He felt the 
heat of electric blankets swathed 
about his body. Occasionally a 
tube would be in his mouth and 
he would taste liquid food and 
feel a pleasant warmth in his 
stomach. 

Always, it seemed, the face was 
above him, floating in the obscur- 
ing mist. Always, it seemed, the 
soft voice was echoing in his ears: 
Swallow this now. Thats it. 
You must have food. Or, Close 
your eyes. Dont strain. It wont 



be long. Youre getting better. 

Better, hed think. Getting bet- 
ter. 

At last, after one of the periods 
of lethargy, his eyes opened. The 
mist brightened, then dissolved. 

He beheld the cracked, un- 
painted ceiling of a small room, 
its colorless walls broken with a 
single, roimd window. He saw the 
footboard of his aluminite bed 
and the outlines of his feet be- 
neath a faded blanket. 

Finally he saw the face and fig- 
ure that stood at his side. 

You are better? the kind 
voice asked. 

T he face was that of a girl 

probably somewhere between 
twenty-five and thirty. Her fea- 
tures, devoid of makeup, had an 
unhealthy-looking pallor, as if she 
hadnt used a sunlamp for many 
weeks. Yet, at the same time, her 
firm slim body suggested a solid- 
ity and a strength. Her straight 
brown hair was combed back- 
ward, tight upon her scalp, and 
drawn together in a knot at the 
nape of her neck. 

I  I am better, he mur- 
mured. His words were still slow 
and thick. I am going to live? 
You will live. 

He thought for a moment. 
How long have I been here? 
Nine days. 

You took care of me? He 
noted the deep, dark circles be- 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



65 



neath her sleep-robbed eyes. 

She nodded. 

Youre the one who carried 
me when I was shot? 

Yes. 

Why? 

Suddenly he begah to cough. 
Breath came hard. She held the 
oxygen mask in readiness. He 
shook his head, not wanting it 

Why? he asked again. 

It would be a long story. Per- 
haps Ill tell you tomorrow. 

A new thought cloaked in sud- 
den fear, entered his murky con- 
sciousness. Tell me, will  will 
I be well again? Will I be able 
to walk? 

He lay back then, panting, ex- 
hausted. 

You have nothing to worry 
about the girl said softly. Her 
cool hand touched his hot fore- 
head. Rest. Well talk later. 

His eyes closed and breath 
came easier. He slept. 

When he next awoke, his gaze 
turned first to the window. There 
was light outside, but he had no 
way of knowing if this was morn- 
ing, noon or afternoon  or on 
what planet. 

He saw no white-domed build- 
ings of Hoover City, no formal 
lines of green-treed parks, no 
streams of buzzing gsnro-cars. 
There was only a translucent and 
infinite whiteness. It was as if the 
window were set on the edge of 
the Universe overlooking a sol- 



emn, silent and matterless void. 
The girl entered the room. 
Hi, she said, smiling. The 
dark half-moons under her eyes 
were less prominent Her face was 
relaxed. 

She increased the pressure in 
his rubberex pillows and helped 
him rise to a sitting position. 
Where are we? he asked. 
Venus. 

Were not in Hoover City? 
No. 

He looked at her, wondering. 
You wont tell me? 

Not yet. Later, perhaps. 
Then how did you get me 
here? How did we escape from 
the Inn? 

CHE SHRUGGED. We have 
^ friends who can be bribed. A 
hiding place in the city, the use 
of a small desert-taxi, a pass to 
leave the city  these can be had 
for a price. 

Youll tell me your name? 
Maggie. 

Why did you save me? 

Her eyes twinkled mischiev- 
ously. Because youre a good as- 
trogator. 

His own eyes widened. How 
did you know that? 

She sat on a plain chair beside 
his bed. I know everything about 
you. Lieutenant Curtis. 

How did you learn my name? 
I destroyed all my papers   

I know that youre twenty- 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



ft 

O 



four. Bom July 10, 1971. Or- 
nbaned at four, you attended 
Boys Town in the Catskills till 
you were 19. You graduated from 
Academy at White Sands last 
June with a major in Astrogation. 
Your rating for the five-year pe- 
riod was 3.8  the second highest 
in a class of fifty-seven. Your only 
low mark in the five years was a 
3.2 in History of Martian Civili- 
zation. Want me to go on? 
Fascinated, Ben nodded. 

You were accepted as junior 
astrogation officer aboard the 
Odyssey. You did well on your 
flight from Roswell to Luna City. 
In a barroom fight in Luna City, 
you struck and killed a man 
named Arthur Cobb, a pre-fab 
salesman. Youve been charged 
with second degree murder and 
escape. A reward of 5,000 credits 
has been offered for your capture. 
You came to Hoover City in the 
hope of finding a renegade group 
of spacemen who operate beyond 
Mars. You were looking for them 
in the Blast Inn. 

He gaped incredulously, strug- 
gling to rise from his pillows. I 
 dont get it. 

There are ways of finding out 
what we want to know. As I told 
you, we have many friends. 

He fell back into his pillows, 
breathing hard. She rose quickly. 

Im sorry, she said. I 
shouldnt have told you yet. I felt 
so happy because youre alive. 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



Rest now. Well talk again soon. 

Maggie, you  you said Id 
live. You didnt say Id be able to 
walk again. 

She lowered her gaze. I hope 
youll be able to. 

But you dont think I will, do 

you? 

I dont know. Well try walk- 
ing tomorrow. Dont think about 
it now. Rest. 

He tried to relax, but his mind 
was a vortex of conjecture. 

Just one more question, he 
almost whispered. 

Yes? 

The man I killed  did he 
have a wife? 

She hesitated. He thought. 
Damn it, of all the questions, why 
did I ask that? 

Finally she said, He had a 
wife. 

Children? 

Two. I dont know their ages. 

She left the room. 

ff ; SANK into the softness of 
his bed. As he turned over on 
his side, his gaze fell upon an 
object on a bureau in a far corner 
of the room. 

He sat straight up, his chest 
heaving. 

The object was a tri-dimen- 
sional photo of a rock-faced man 
in a merchant spacemans um- 
form. He was a giant of a man 
with a neatly trimmed red beard! 
Ben stared at the photo for a 



66 



67 



long time. At length, he slipped 
into restless sleep. Images of faces 
and echoes of words spun through 
his brain. 

The dead man returned to him. 
Bloodied lips cursed at him. 
Glassy eyes accused him. Some- 
where were two lost children cry- 
ing in the night. 

And towering above him was a 
red-bearded man whose great 
hands reached down and beck- 
oned to him. Ben crawled through 
the night on hands and knees, his 
legs numb and useless. The crjHing 
of the children was a chilling wail 
in his ears. 

His head rose and turned to the 
red-bearded man. His pleading 
voice screamed out to him in a 
thick, harsh cackle. Yet even as 
he screamed, the giant disap- 
peared, to be replaced by white- 
booted feet stomping relentlessly 
toward him. 

He awoke still screaming . 

A night without darkness 
passed. Ben lay waiting for Mag- 
gies return, a question already 
formed in his mind. 

She came and at once he asked, 
Who is the man with the red 
beard? 

She smiled. I was right then 
when I gave you that thumbnail 
biog. You were looking for him, 
werent you? 

Who is he? 

She sat on the chair beside him. 

My husband, she said softly. 

68 



He began to understand. And 
your husband needs an astroga- 
tor? Thats why you saved me? 
We need all the good men we 
can get 

Where is he? 

She cocked her head in mock 
suspicion. Somewhere between 
Mercury and Pluto. Hes building 
a new base for us  and a home 
for me. When his ship returns. Ill 
be going to him. 

Why arent you with him 
now? 

He said unexplored space is 
no place for a woman. So Ive 
been studying criminal reports 
and photos from the Interplanet- 
ary Bureau of Investigation and 
trying to find recruits like your- 
self. You know how we operate? 
He told her the tales hed 
heard. 

CHE NODDED. There are 
^ quite a few of us now  
about a thousand  and a dozen 
ships. Our base used to be here on 
Venus, down toward the Pole. 
The dome were in now was de- 
signed and built by us a few years 
ago after we got pushed off 
Mars. We lost a few men in the 
construction, but with almost 
every advance in space, someone 
dies. 

Venus is getting too civilized. 
Were moving out and this dome 
is only a temporary base when we 
have cases like yours. The new 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



jjgge  I might as well tell you 
going to be an asteroid. I wont 
gay which one. 

Dont get the idea that were 
outlaws. Sure, about half our 
group is wanted by the Bureau, 
but we make honest livings. Were 
just people like yourself and 
Jacob. 

Jacob? Your husband? 

She laughed. Makes you think 
of a Biblical character, doesnt it? 
Jacobs ansdhing but that. And 
just plain Jake reminds one of a 
grizzled old uranium prospector 
and he isnt like that, either. 

She lit a cigarette. Anyway, the 
wanted ones stay out beyond the 
frontiers. Jacob and those like 
him can never return to Earth  
not even to Hoover City  ex- 
cept dead. The others are physi- 
cal or psycho rejects who couldnt 
get clearance if they went back 
to Earth. They know nothing but 
rocketing and wont give up. They 
bring in our ships to frontier ports 
like Hoover City to unload cargo 
and take on supplies. 

Dont the authorities object? 
Not very strongly. The I. B. I. 
has too many problems right here 
to search the whole System for a 
few two-bit crooks. Besides, we 
carry cargoes of almost pure 
uranium and tungsten and all the 
stuff thats scarce on Earth and 
Mars and Venus. Nobody really 
cares whether it comes from the 
asteroids or Hades. If we want to 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



risk our lives mining it, thats our 
business. 

She pursed her lips. But if 
they guessed how strong we are 
or that we have friends planted 
in the I. B. I.  well, things 
might be different. There prob- 
ably would be a crackdown. 

Ben scowled. What happens 
if there is a crackdown? And 
what will you do when Space 
Corps ships officially reach the 
asteroids? They cant ignore you 
then. 

Then we move on. We dream 
up new gimmicks for our crates 
and take them to Jupiter, Saturn, 
Uranus, Neptune, Pluto. In time, 
maybe, well be pushed out of the 
System itself. Maybe it wont be 
the white-suited boys wholl make 
that first hop to the stars. It could 
be us, you know  if we live long 
enough. But that Asteroid Belt is 
murder. You cant follow the text- 
book rules of astrogation out 
there. You make up your own. 

B en stiffened. And thats 

why you want me for an as- 
trogator. 

Maggie rose, her eyes wistful. 
If you want to come  and if you 
get well. She looked at him 
strangely. 

Suppose   He fought to find 
the right words. Suppose I got 
well and decided not to join 
Jacob. What would happen to 
me? Would you let me go? 

69 



Her thin face was criss-crossed 
by emotion  alarm, then bewil- 
derment, then fear. I dont know. 
That would be up to Jacob. 

He lay biting his lip, staring at 
the photo of Jacob. She touched 
his hand and it seemed that sad- 
ness now dominated the flurry of 
emotion that had coursed through 
her. 

The only thing that matters, 
really, she murmured, is your 
walking again. Well try this aft- 
ernoon. Okay? 

Okay, he said. 

When she left, his eyes were 
still turned toward Jacobs photo. 

He was like two people, he 
thought. 

Half of him was an officer of 
the Space Corps. Perhaps one sin- 
gle starry-eyed boy out of ten 
thousand was lucky enough to 
reach that goal. 

He remembered a little picture 
book his mother had given him 
when she was alive. Under the 
bright pictures of spacemen were 
the captions: 

A Space Officer Is Honest. 
A Space Officer Is Loyal. A 
Space Officer Is Dutiful. 

Honesty, loyalty, duty. Trite 
words, but without those con- 
cepts, mankind would never have 
broken away from the planet that 
held it prisoner for half a million 
years. 

Without them, Everson, after 
three failures and a hundred men 



dead, would never have landed on] 
the Moon twenty-seven years ago.,! 

OEN SIGHED. He had a debt 
to pay. A good officer would] 
pay that debt. Hed surrender and] 
take his punishment Hed rip the  
crimson braid from his uniform. 
Hed prevent the Academy for 
the Conquest of Space from being 
labeled the school of a murderer 
and a coward. 

And by doing these things, the' 
haunting image of a dead man 
would disappear from his visioa 

But the other half of Ben Cur- 
tis was the boy whod stood trem-^ 
bling beneath a night sky of beck- 
oning stars. 

The eyes in Jacobs photo 
seemed to be staring at the boy 
in him, not at the officer. They ap- 
peared both pleading and hopeful 
They were like echoes of cold, 
barren worlds and limitless space, 
of lurking and savage death. They 
held the terror of loneliness and 
of exile, of constant flight and hid- 
ing. 

But, too, they represented a 
strength that could fulfill a boys 
dream, that could carry a man to 
new frontiers. They, rather than 
the neat white uniform, now of- 
fered the key to shining miracles. 
That key was what Ben wanted. 

But he asked himself, as he had 
a thousand times, If I follow 
Jacob, can I leave the dead man 
behind? 



70 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



He tried to stretch his legs and 
he cursed their numbness. He 
smiled grimly. For a moment, hed 
forgotten. How futile now to 
think of stars! 

What if he were to be like this 
always? Jacob would not want a 
man with dead legs. Jacob would 
either send him back to Earth 
or  ^Ben shuddered  see that he 
was otherwise disposed of. And 
disposal would be the easier 
course. 

T his was the crisis. He sat 
on the side of the bed, Mag- 
gie before him, her strong arm 
about his waist. 

Afraid? she asked. 

Afraid, he repeated, shaking. 
It was as if all time had been 
funneled into this instant, as if 
this moment lay at the very vor- 
tex of all a mans living and desir- 
ing. There was no room in Bens 
mind for thoughts of Jacob now. 

You can walk, Maggie said 
confidently. I know you can. 

He moved his toes, ankles, legs. 
He began to rise, slowly, faltering- 
ly. The firm pressure around his 
waist increased. 

He stood erect. His legs felt 
like tree stumps, but here and 
there were a tingling and a 
warmth, a sensitivity. 

Can you make it to the win- 
dow? Maggie asked. 

No, no, not that far. 

Try! Please try! 



She guided him forward. 

His feet shuffled. Stomp, stomp. 
The pressure left his waist. Mag- 
gie stepped away, walked to the 
window, turned back toward him. 

He halted, swaying. Not 
alone, he mouthed fearfully. I 
cant get there by myself. 

Of course you can! Maggies 
voice contained unexpected impa- 
tience. 

Ashamed, he forced his feet to 
move. At times, he thought he was 
going to crash to the floor. He 
lumbered on, hesitating, fighting 
to retain his balance. Maggie 
waited tensely, as if ready to leap 
to his side. 

Then his eyes turned straight 
ahead to the window. This was 
the first time hed actually seen 
the arid, dust-cloaked plains of 
the second planet. He straight- 
ened, face aglow, as though a 
small-boy enthusiasm had been 
reborn in him. 

His tree-stump legs carried him 
to the window. He raised shaking 
hands against the thick glassite 
pane. 

Outside, the swirling white dust 
was omnipresent and unchalleng- 
ed. It cut smooth the surfaces of 
dust-veiled rocks. It clung to the 
squat desert shrubbery, to the tall 
skeletal shapes of Venusian nee- 
dle-plants and to the swish-tailed 
lizards that skittered beneath 
them. 

The shrill of wind, audible 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



71 



through the glassite, was like the 
anguished complaint of the planet 
itself, like the wail of an entity 
imprisoned in a dark tomb of 
dust Venus was a planet of fury, 
eternally howling its wrath at be- 
ings isolated from sunlight and 
greenery, from the clean black- 
ness of space and the warm glow 
of sister-planet and star. 

The dust covered all, absorbed 
all, eradicated all. The dust was 
master. The dome, Ben felt, was 
as transitory as a tear-drop of 
fragile glass falling down, down, 
to crash upon stone. 

Is it always like this? he 
asked. Doesnt the wind ever 
stop? 

Sometimes the wind dies. 
Sometimes, at night, you can see 
the lights from the city. 

TE KEPT staring. The dome, 
-"he thought, was a symbol of 
Mans littleness in a hostile uni- 
verse. 

But, too, it was a symbol of 
his courage and defiance. And 
perhaps Mans greatest strength 
lay in the very audacity that 
drove him to build such domes. 

You like it, dont you? Mag- 
gie asked. Its lonely and ugly 
and wild, but you like it. 

He nodded, breathless. 

She murmured, Jacob used to 
say it isnt the strange sights that 
thrill spacemen  its the thoughts 
that the sights inspire. 

72 




He nodded again, still staring. 

She began to laugh. Softly at 
first, then more loudly. It was the 
kind of laughter that is close to 
crying. 

Youve been standing there 
for ten minutes! Youre going to 
walk again! Youre going to be 
well! 

He turned to her, smiling with 
the joyous realization that he had 
actually stood that long without 
being aware of it. 

Then his smile died. 

Standing behind Maggie, in an 
open doorway, was a gray^ scaly, 
toadlike monster  a six-and-a- 
half-foot Venusian. He was mo- 
tionless as a statue, his green-lid- 
ded eyes staring curiously at Ben. 
His scaly hand was tight about 
the butt of an old-faShioned heat, 
pistol bolstered to his hip. 

Maggie suppressed a smile. | | 
Dont be frightened, Ben. This 
is Simon  Simple Simon, we call 
him. His I. Q. isnt too high, but 
he makes a good helper and 
guard for me. Hes been so an- 
xious to see you, but I thought 
itd be better if he waited until 
you were well. 

Ben nodded, fascinated by the 
apparent muscular solidity of the 
creature. It hadnt occurred to his 
numbed mind that he and Mag- 
gie were not the sole occupants 
of the dome. 

But Maggie had acted wisely, 
he thought. His nightmares had 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 






COFFIN FOR JACOB 



been terrifying enough without 
bringing Simple Simon into them. 

Shake hands with Ben, she 
told the Venusian. 

Simple Simon lumbered for- 
ward, then paused. His eyes 
blinked. No, he grated. 

Maggie gasped. Why, Simple 
Simon, whafs the matter? 

The gray creature rasped, Ben 
 he not one of us. He thinks  
different In thoughts  thinks es- 
cape. Earth. 

l^AGGIE PALED. He is one 
of us, Simon. She stepped 
forward and seized the Venusians 
arm. You go to your room. Stand 
guard. You guard Ben just like 
you guard me. Understand? 
Simple Simon grunted, I 
guard. If Ben go  I stop him. I 
stop him good. He raised his 
huge hands suggestively. 

No, Simon! Remember what 
Jacob told you. We hurt no one. 
Ben is our friend. You help him! 
The Venusian thought for a 
long moment Then he nodded. 
I help Ben. But if go  stop. 

She led the creature out of the 
room and closed the door. 

Whew, Ben sighed. Id heard 
those fellows were telepaths. Now 
I Know" 

Maggies trembling hands 
reached for a cigarette. I  I 
guess I didnt think, Ben. Venu- 
sians cant really read your mind, 
but they see your feelings, your 



emotions. Its a logical evolution- 
ary development, I suppose. Au- 
ditory and visual commxmication 
are difficult here, so evolution 
turned to empathy. And thats 
why Jacob keeps a few Venusians 
in our group. They can detect any 
feeling of disloyalty before it be- 
comes serious. 

Ben remembered Simple Sim- 
ons icy gaze and the way his 
rough hand had gripped his heat 
pistol. They could be dangerous. 

Not really. Theyre as loyal as 
Earth dogs to their masters. I 
mean they wouldnt be dangerous 
to anyone whos loyal to us. 

Silently, she helped him back 
to his bed. 

Im sorry, Maggie  sorry I 
havent decided yet. 

She neither answered nor look- 
ed at him. 

Grimly, he realized that his 
status had changed. He was no 
longer a patient; he was a pris- 
oner. 

A Venusian day passed, and a 
Venusian night. The dust swirled 
and wind blew, as constant as the 
whirl of indecision in Bens mind. 

Maggie was patient. Once, 
when she caught him gazing at 
Jacobs photo, she asked, Not 
yet? 

He looked away. Not yet. 

TTE LEARNED that the little 
^dome consisted of three 
rooms, each shaped like pieces 



f 

^ of a fluffy pie with narrow con- 
Crete hallways between. 

His room served as a bedroom 
and he discovered that Maggie 
slept on a pneumatic cot in the 
kitchen. The third room, opening 
into the airlock, housed a small 
hydroponics garden, sunlamp, 
short-wave visi-radio, and such 
emergency equipment as oxygen 
tanks, windsuits, and vita-rations. 
It was here that Simple Simon re- 
mained most of the time, tending 
the garden or peering into the 
viewscreen that revealed the ter- 
rain outside the dome. 

Maggie prepared Bens meals, 
bringing them to him on a tray 
until he was able to sit at a table 
As his paralysis diminished, he 
helped her with cooking  with 
Simple Simon standing by as a 
mute, motionless observer. 

Occassionally Maggie would 
talk of her girlhood in a small 
town in Missouri and how shed 
dreamed of journeying to the 
stars. 

 Stars are for boys, theyd tell 
me, but I was a queer one. While 
other gals were dressing for their 
junior proms, Id be in sloppy 
slacks down at the spaceport with 
Jacob. 

She laughed often  perhaps in 
a deliberate attempt to disguise 
the omnipresent tension. And her 
laughter was like laughter on 
Earth, floating through comfort- 
able houses and over green fields 
I 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



and through clear blue sky. When 
she laughed, she possessed a beau- 
ty- 

Despite her pale face and lack 
of makeup, Ben realized that she 
was no older than he. 

li Id only known her back on 
Earth, he thought. It I  And 
then he told himself. Youve got 
enough problems. Dont create an- 
other one! 

Finally, except for a stiffness 
in his leg joints, hed fully recov- 
ered. 

How much time do I have? 
he asked. 

Before you decide? 

Yes. 

Very little. Jacobs ship is on 
its way. Itll be here  well, you 
cant tell about these things. Two 
or three Earth days, maybe even 
tomorrow. Itll stay in Hoover 
City long enough to discharge and 
load cargo. Then itll stop here 
for us and return to  to our new 
base. 

What do you think Jacob 
would do if I didnt want to go 
with him? 

S HE SHOOK her head. You 
asked me that before. I said 
I didnt know. 

Ben thought, I know a lot 
about you, Jacob. I know yot/re 
based on an asteroid. I know how 
many men you have, how many 
ships. I know where this dome is. 
I know you have men planted in 



74 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



75 



the I. B. I. Would you let me go, 
knowing these things? How great 
is your immunity from the law? 
Do you love freedom so much 
that yot/d kill to help preserve it? 

Fear crawled through his mind 
on icy legs. 

Maggie, he said, what would 
Jacob do if he were me? 

She looked amused. Jacob 
wouldnt have gotten into your 
situation. He wouldnt have struck 
Cobb. Jacob is   

A man? And Fm still a boy? 
Is that what you mean? 

Not exactly. I think youll be 
a man after you make your deci- 
sion. 

He frowned, not liking her an- 
swer. 

You think the dream of 
going into space is a bosss dream, 
that it cant belong to a man, 
too? 

Oh, no. Jacob still has the 
dream. Most of our men do. And 
in a man, its even more wonder- 
ful than in a boy. Then her face 
became more serious. Ben, 
youve got to decide soon. And 
its got to be a complete decision. 
You can have no doubt in your 
mind. 

He nodded. On account of 
Simon, you mean, 

She motioned for him to come 
to the window in his room. He 
gazed outward, following the line 
of her finger as she pointed. 

He saw a man-sized mound of 



stones, dimly visible beneath the 
wind-whipped dust 

A grave. 

He was a man like you, Mag- 
gie said softly. God knows Sim- 
on didnt try to kill him. But he 
was escaping. He  ^he made the 
decision not to join us. Simon 
sensed it There was a struggle. 
Simons hands  well, he doesnt 
realize   

She didnt have to explain fur- 
ther. Ben knew what those 
mighty scaly paws could do. 

^^HE MOMENTS were now 
like bits of eternity cloaked in 
frozen fear. Somewhere in the 
blackness of interplanetary space, 
Jacobs rocket was streaking 
closer and closer to Venus. How 
far away was it? A million miles? 
Fifty thousand? Or was it now  
right now  ripping through the 
murky Venusian atmosphere 
above the dome? 

A complete decision, Maggie 
had said. 

Jacob didnt want a potential 
deserter in his group. And you 
couldnt pretend that you were 
loyal to Jacob  not with mon- 
strosities like Simple Simon 
about 

Soon Jacob, not Ben, might 
have to make a decision a deci- 
sion that could result in a second 
cairn of stones on the wind-swept 
desert. 

Ben shivered. 



76 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Before retiring, he wandered 
nervously into the supply room. 
Maggi was poised over the visi- 
radio. Simple Simon was intently 
scanning the night-shrouded ter- 
rain in the viewscreen. 

Any news? Ben asked Mag- 
gie. 

The girl grunted negatively 
without looking up. 

Bens gaze fell upon the array 
of oxygen masks, windsuits, vita- 
rations. Then, on a littered shelf, 
he spied a small Venusian com- 
pass. 

Almost automatically, his hand 
closed over it. His brain stirred 
with a single thought; A compass 
could keep a man traveling in a 
straight line. 

Simple Simon restlessly shift- 
ed. He turned to Ben, blinking in 
the frighteningly alien equivalent 
of a suspicious scowl. 

Bens hand tightened about the 
compass. He tried to relax, to 
force all thought of it from his 
mind. He stared at the view- 
screen, concentrating on the 
ceaseless drift of dust. 

The Venusians eyes studied 
him curiously, as if searching 
his mind for the illusive echo of 
a feeling that had given him 
alarm. 

I think Ill turn in, yawned 
Ben.  Night, Maggie. 

Simon frowned, apparently 
frustrated in his mental search. 
Ben  not one of us. I  watch. 



W ITHOUT ANSWERING, 
Ben returned to his room, 
the compass hot and moist from 
the perspiration in his hand. 

He took a deep breath. 

Why had he taken the com- 
pass? He wasnt sure. Perhaps, he 
reflected, his decision had already 
been made, deep beneath the sur- 
face of consciousness. 

He stood before the window, 
peering into the night. He knew 
that to attempt to sleep was futile. 
Sleep, for the past few days an 
ever-ready friend, had become a 
hostile stranger. 

God, his brain cried, what shall 
I do? 

Slowly, the dust outside the 
window settled. The scream of 
wind was no longer audible. His 
startled eyes beheld dim, faraway 
lights  those of Hoover City, he 
guessed. 

It was as if, for the space of a 
few seconds, some cosmic power 
had silenced the Venusian fury, 
had guided him toward making 
his decision. 

He whipped up his compass. 
He barely had time to complete 
the measurement. 

Sixty-eight degrees, he read. 
Northeast by east. 

Fresh wind descended onto the 
plain. Dancing dust erased the 
vision of the lights. 

Sixty-eight, sixty-eight, he 
kept muttering. 

But now there was nothing to 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



77 



do  except try to sleep and be 
ready. 

Strong hands shook him out of 
restless sleep. He opened bis eyes 
and saw complete darkness. He 
thought at first that his eyesight 
had failed. 

Ben! Wake up! Maggies 
voice came to him, crisp, com- 
manding. The rockets coming. 
Ive decoded the message. We 
only have a few minutes. 

The girl snapped on a small 
bulkhead light. She left him alone 
to dress. 

He slid out of bed, a drowsiness 
still in him. He reached for his 
clothing. Abruptly, the full im- 
plication of what she had said 
struck him. 

Jacobs rocket was coming. 
This was the time for decision, 
yet within his taut body there was 
only a jungle of conflicting im- 
pulses. 

AGGIE RETURNED, her 
face hard, her eyes asking 
the silent question. 

Ben stood frozen. The slow sec- 
onds beat against his brain like 
waves of ice. 

At last she said, Ready, Ben? 
She spoke evenly, but her search- 
ing gaze belied the all-important 
significance of her words. 

In the dim light, the photo- 
graph of Jacob was indistinguish- 
able, but Ben could still see the 
image of the dead man. 

78 



He thought, I cant run away 
with Jacob like a selfish, coward- 
ly kid! No matter how bright the 
stars would bet that brightness 
couldnt destroy the image of a 
dead man with staring eyes. No 
matter what Jacob and Simon do 
to me, Ive got to try to get back 
to Earth. 

He suddenly felt clean inside. 
He was no longer ashamed to hold 
his head high. 

Maggie, he said. 

Yes? 

Ive made my decision. 

Outside the window, a waterfall 
of flame cascaded onto the desert, 
pushing aside the dust and the 
darkness. The deep-throated 
sound of rocket engines grumbled 
above the whining wind. The floor 
of the dome vibrated. 

The rockets here! Maggie 
cried. 

The flaming exhaust from the 
ship dissolved into the night. The 
rocket thunder faded into the 
wind. 

The alarm on the domes inner 
airlock bulkhead rang. Maggie 
ran like a happy child through the 
concrete corridor, Ben following. 
She bounded into the supply 
room, pushed Simple Simon aside, 
stopped before a control panel. 
Her fingers flew over switches and 
levers. 

The airlock door slid open. A 
short, stubble-bearded man clad 
in windsuit and transparalite hel- 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



met stomped in. He unscrewed 
the face plate of his helmet. His 
ears were too big and he looked 
like a fat doll. 

Were ready for you, Mrs. 
pierce, he said. 

Maggie nodded eagerly. She 
whirled back to Ben. Hurry! Get 
your helmet and suit on! 

She spun back to the big-eared 
little man. Cargo unloaded? All 
set for the flight home? 

Home, Ben thought She calls 
a place shes never seen home. 
Cargos unloaded. 

No trouble with the I. B. I.? 
No investigation? 

Not yet. Were good for a few 
more hauls, I guess. 

B en slipped on his windsuit. 

He glariced at the control 
panel for the airlock. Yes, he 
could manipulate it easily. He 
contemplated the heat pistol at 
Simple Simons hip. A tempting 
idea  but, no, he wanted no more 
of violence. 

Then he bit his lip. He cleared 
his mind of all thought. 

Simple Simon evidently had 
not noted the impulse that flicked 
his adrenals into pumping. 

The big-eared man stared 
strangely at Maggie. Mrs. Pierce, 
before we go, Id better tell you 
something. 

Y ou can do that on the 
rocket. 

Maggie stepped forward to 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 




seize her helmet The man block- 
ed her movement 

Mrs. Pierce, your husband  
Jacob  was on the rocket. 
What? The girl released a 
broken, unbelievirig little laugh. 
Why, he wouldnt dare! That 
idiot, taking a chance like   
Alarm twisted her features. He  
he wasnt captured   

No, he wasnt captured. And 
he took no chance, Mrs. Pierce. 
A moment of silence. Then she 
sucked in her breath. 

Ben understood. Words echoed 
in his mind: Jacob and those 
like him can never return to 
Earth, not even to Hoover City  
except dead. 

Maggie swayed. Ben and the 
big-eared little man jumped to 
her side, guided her back into the 
compartment used as a kitchen. 
They helped her to a chair. Ben 
turned on the fire beneath a cof- 
fee pot. Simple Simon watched 
silently. 

Her eyes empty and staring, 
Maggie asked, How did it hap- 
pen? 

We were heading into a clump 
of baby asteroids the size of peas. 
The radar warning was too slow. 
We couldnt pull away; we had to 
stop. The deceleration got him  
crushed him. He lived for five 
minutes afterward. 

The little man produced a fold- 
ed paper from a pocket of his 
suit. Jacob said he had some 

79 



ideas he had to get down on 
paper. God knows why, but dur- 
ing those five minutes he drew 
up this plan for improving our 
deceleration compensator. 

Plans for   she gasped. 

He was a spaceman, Mrs. 
Pierce. The man handed her the 
paper. Ben caught a glimpse of 
scribbled circuits, relays, cathodes. 

When he finished, the man 
continued, he said to tell you 
that he loved you. 

She started to hand the paper 
back. 

The spaceman shook his head. 
No, the original i;s yours. Ive 
made copies for our own ships 
and for the brass in Hoover City. 

1YT AGGIE KEPT talking to the 
little man, lost in the world 
he was creating for her. Ben was 
excluded from that world, a stran- 
ger. 

Then Ben saw his opportunity. 

Simple Simons face was ex- 
pressionless, but tears were zig- 
zagging down his gray, reptilian 
features. Ben stared for several 
seconds, wondering if his vision 
had deceived him. Till this in- 
stant, hed somehow assumed that 
the big Venusian was devoid of 
emotion. 

But Simple Simon was crying. 

It was unlikely that the crea- 
ture would peer into his mind at 
a moment like this. 

Step by step, Ben backed to- 



ward the open door in the rear 
of the compartment. Silently, he 
slipped through it. He attempted 
to move automatically, without 
feeling. 

He darted into the supply 
room. The continued drone of 
voices told him his action had 
not been observed. 

He didnt like it at all. Escap- 
ing this way was like crumpling 
Maggies grief into an acid ball 
and hurling it into her face. But 
he had no other choice. 

A few seconds later, he was 
dressed in windsuit and oxygen 
helmet. A can of vita-rations was 
strapped to his back and his com- 
pass was in his hand. 

Heart refusing to stop pound- 
ing, he threw the levers and 
switches to open the airlock. He 
cringed under the grinding, scrap- 
ing noise, as loud to him as the 
ringing clash of swords. 

But the murmur of voices con- 
tinued. 

He stepped outside. The air- 
lock door clanged shut. He was 
caught by the biting dust and the 
shrill banshee wind. He fell, then 
scrambled erect. 

To his right, he saw the silver 
sheen of Jacobs rocket shining 
behind a row of golden, eyelike 
portholes. Beneath it were black 
outlines of moving, helmeted fig- 
ures. 

He bent low to study the lumi- 
nous dial of his compass. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Behind him was a grating and 
a sliding of metal. A movement 
in the darkness. 

He txirned. 

Dimly illuminated by the glow 
from the rocket ports was the 
grim, stony face of Simple Simon. 

T he VENUSIAN was like a 
piece of the night itself, com- 
pressed and solidified to form a 
living creature. The impression 
was contradicted only by the 
glowing whiteness of his eyes. 

The reptilian body shuffled for- 
ward. The scales on his great face 
and chest reflected the lights from 
the rocket like Christmas tree 
ornaments dusted with gold. 

His hands reached out. 

Words thundered in Bens me- 
mory: God knows Simon didnt 
try to kill him. Simons hands  
well, he doesnt realize  

Ben hopped away from the 
groping hands, slipped the com- 
pass into his pocket, balled his 
fists. The wind caught at his body. 
He stumbled, then recovered his 
balance. 

Despite the wind and his suits 
bulkiness, he was surprised at his 
own agility. He recalled that the 
gravitational pull of Venus was 
only four-fifths of Earths. That 
was an advantage. 

Crouching against the wind, he 
stepped to his left, away from 
the rocket. He was reluctant to 
enter an area of greater darkness, 

A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



but neither did he want to risk 
observation by the men hed seen 
near Jacobs ship. 

Simple Simon followed. He 
moved like an automaton, fimc- 
tioning with awkward, methodical 
slowness. His hands, speckled 
with reflected light, rose up out 
of the darkness. 

Ben stepped back, wiped the 
dust from his clouded face-plate. 
One swoop of those hands, he 
knew, could shatter his helmet, 
destroy his oxygen supply, leave 
him choking on deadly methane 
and carbon dioxide. 

But, so far, Simon seemed bent 
on capture, not destruction. That 
fact gave Ben a second advantage. 

Scaly fingers, moving now with 
greater swiftness, closed over the 
shoulder of his suit. Ben felt him- 
self being pulled forward, a child 
in the grasp of a giant. His brief 
surge of confidence vanished. Cold 
terror swept upon him. 

He lashed out wildly. His right 
fist found his target, found it so 
well that the skin split on his 
gloved knuckles. 

Simons head snapped back. 
The grasping fingers slipped from 
Bens suit. 

But still the Venusian lumber- 
ed ahead, an irresistible jugger- 
naut, the hands continually grop- 
ing. Ben ducked and slipped aside. 
The can of vita-rations was rip- 
ped from his back. 

He crouched low, fighting the 



80 



81 



wind, maneuvering for another 
blow. His lungs ached, but he had 
no opportunity to increase his hel- 
mets oxygen flow. His weak leg 
muscles were beginning to pain as 
though with needles of fire. 

^T^HE HANDS crashed down 
upon his shoulders. This 
time, his fist found Simons stom- 
ach. The creature released a grunt 
audible above the howling of 
wind. His body doubled up. 

Ben struck again and again. 
His lungs throbbed as if theyd 
break through his chest. A fresh 
layer of dust coated his face- 
plate, nearly blinding him. He 
fought instinctively, gauntleted 
fists battering. 

Simple Simon fell. 

Ben brushed away the dust 
from his face-plate, turned up his 
helmets oxygen valve. Then he 
knelt by the fallen creature. 

A new fear came to Ben Curtis 
 a fear almost as great as that of 
being caught in Simons crushing 
grip. It was the fear that he had 
killed again. 

But even in the near-darkness, 
he could distinguish the labored 
rise and fall of the massive chest. 

Thank God, he thought. 

From the direction of Jacobs 
ship, a flash of light caught his 
eye. The black shapes of helmeted 
men were becoming larger, nearer. 

Ben tensed. The spacemen 
couldnt have heard sounds of 










the struggle, but they might have 
noticed movement. 

Puffing, Ben plunged into the 
darkness to his left, slowing only 
long enough to consult the dial 
of his compass. 

Sixty-eight degrees, he 
breathed. 

The compass dial was now his 
only companion and his only 
hope. It was the one bit of reality 
in a world of black, screaming 
nightmare. 

A t first Ben Curtis fought 
the wind and the dust and 
the night. His fists were clenched 
as they had been while struggling 
with Simon. Each step forward 
was a challenge, a struggle and  



so far, at any rate  a victory. 

But how far was the city? Five 
miles? Ten? How could you 
judge distance through a haze of 
alien sand? 

And were Simple Simon or Ja- 
cobs men following? How good 
was a Venusians vision at night? 
Would the scaly hands find him 
even now, descending on him 
from out of the blackness? 

He kept walking, walking. Six- 
ty-eight degrees. 

Gradually his senses grew 
numb to the fear of recapture. He 
became oblivious to the wailing 
wind and the beat of dust against 
his face-plate. He moved like a 
robot. His mind wandered back 
through time and space, a pin- 



82 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



A COFFIN FOR JACOB 



83 




wheel spinning with unforgettable 
impressions, faces, voices. 

He saw the white features of a 
dead man, their vividness fading 
now and no longer terrifying. 

A Space Officer Is Honest A 
Space Officer Is Loyal. A Space 
Officer Is Dutiful. The words 
were like clear, satisfying music. 

He cursed at the image of a 
pop-eyed Martian boy. A tres fine 
table, monsieur. Close in the shad- 
ows. 

And yet, he told himself, the 
boy really didnt do anything 
wrong. He was only helping to 
capture a murderer. Maybe he 
was lonesome for Mars and need- 
ed money to go home. 

Ben thought of Maggie: While 
other gals were dressing for their 
junior proms, Id be in sloppy 
slacks down at the spaceport with 
Jacob ... If Id only known her 
back on Earth  

Maggie, sitting alone now with 
a wrinkled paper and its mass of 
scrawled circuits. Alone and hol- 
low with grief and needing help. 
Bens throat tightened. Damn it, 
he didnt want to think about that 

What was it the little big-eared 
man had said? Ive made copies 
for our own ships and for the 
brass in Hoover City. 

Why had he said that? Why 
would renegades give their se- 
crets to the Space Corps? The 
Corps would incorporate the dis- 
coveries in their ships. With them. 



theyd reach the asteroids. Jacobs 
group would be pushed even fur- 
ther outward. 

Ben stopped, the wind whip- 
ping at his suit and buffeting his 
helmet  but not as hard as the 
answer he had found. 

J ACOB AND his men had an 
existence to justify, a debt to 
pay. They justified that existence 
and paid that debt by helping 
humanity in its starward advance. 

Maggie had said. We carry car- 
goes of almost pure uranium and 
tungsten and all the stuff thats 
getting scarce on Earth and Mars 
and Venus. If we want to risk our 
lives getting it, thats our business. 
... The dome were in now was 
designed and built by us a few 
years ago. We lost a few men in 
the construction, but with almost 
every advance in space, someone 
dies. 

The wind pressed Ben back. 
The coldness of the Venusian 
night was seeping into his suit. 
It was as if his body were bathed, 
at once, in flame and ice. 

He slipped, fell, his face turn- 
ed toward the sandy ground. He 
did not try to rise. 

Yet his mind seemed to soar 
above the pain, to carry him into 
a wondrous valley of new aware- 
ness. 

Man would never be content 
to stay on nine insignificant 
globes  not when his eyes had 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



w 

the power to stare into a night 
B sky and when his brain had the 
H ability to imagine. There would 
 have to be pioneers to seek out 
I the unknown horror, to face it 
I and defeat it. There would have 
to be signposts lining the great 
road and helping others to follow 
without fear. 

For all the brilliancy of their 
dreams, those men would be the 
lonely ones, the men of no return. 
For all the glory of their brief 
adventure, they would give not 
only their cloaks, but ultimately 
their lives. 

Ben lay trembling in the dark- 
ness. 

His brain cried. You couldnt 
rig up a radar system or a decel- 
eration compensator, but you 
could chart those asteroids. You 
cant bring a man named Cobb 
back to life, but you could help 
a thousand men and women to 
stay alive five or ten or twenty 
years from now. 

Ben knew at last what decision 
Jacob would have made. 

The reverse of sixty-eight on a 
compass is two-forty-eight. 

T IKE FLASHING knitting nee- 
dies, strong hands moved 
about his face-plate, his windsuit, 
his helmet. Then they were wip- 
ing perspiration from his white 
face and placing a wet cloth on 
the back of his neck. 

You were coming back, a 

A COFFIN ,FOR JACOB 




voice kept saying, You were 
coming back. 

His mouth was full of hot cof- 
fee. He became aware of a gen- 
tle face hovering above him, just 
as it had a seeming eternity ago. 

He sat up on the bed, conscious 
now of his surroundings. 

Simon says you were coming 
back, Ben. Why? 

He fought to grasp the mean- 
ing of Maggies words. Simon? 
Simon found me? He brought me 
back? 

Only a short way. He said you 
were almost here. 

Ben closed his eyes, reliving 
the whirlwind of thought that had 
whipped through his brain. He 
mumbled something about pio- 
neers and a scrawled paper and 
a debt and a decision. 

Then he blinked and saw that 
he and Maggie were not alone. 
Simple Simon stood at the foot 
of his bed  and was that a trace 
of a smile on his reptilian mouth? 
And three windsuited spacemen 
stood behind Maggie, helmets in 
their hands. One was a lean- 
boned, reddish-skinned Martian. 

Simple Simon said, Ben  
changed. Thinks  like us. Good 
now. Like  Jacob. 

The little big-eared man step- 
ped up and shook hands with Ben. 
If Simon says so, thats good 
enough for me. 

A blond-haired Earthman help- 
ed Ben from the bed. Legs okay. 



84 



85 



fellow? Think youre ready? 
Ben stood erect unassisted. 
Legs okay. And Im ready. 

He thought for a moment. But 
suppose I wasnt ready. Suppose 
I didnt want to go with you. I 
know a lot about your organiza- 
tion. What would you do? 

The blond man shrugged un- 
troubledly. We wouldnt kill you, 
if thats what you mean. Wed 
probably vote on whether to take 
you with us an3nvay or let you 
go. His smile was frank. Im 
glad we dont have to vote. 

Ben nodded and turned to 
Maggie. Youre still coming with 
us? 

She shook her head, a mist 
shining in her sad eyes. Not on 
this trip. Not without Jacob. Ill 
get one of our desert taxis back 
to Hoover City. Then Ill be going 
to Earth for a while. Ive got some 
thinking to do and thinking is 
done best on Earth. Out here is 
the place for feeling. Her eyes 
lost a little of their pain. But Ill 
be back. Jacob wouldnt stay on 
Earth. Neither will I. Ill be seeing 
you. 

The big-eared man put his 
hand on Bens shoulder. 

Think you can get us back 
to Juno? he asked. 

Ben looked at Maggie and then 
at the big-eared man. Youre as 
good as there, he said confi- 
dently. 

 EDWARD W. LUDWIG 



CLEARANCE SALE 
ONLY 95c EACH 

MtNtMUM ORDER OF THREE BOOKS 
Space Lawyer by Nat Schach was $2.75 
Adventures of a lawyer in the future 
The Fairy Chessman & Tomorrow 
and Tomorrow by L. Padgett was $2.75 
Two novels in one book 
Renaissance by Raymond F. Jones was $2.75 
A novel of the far future 
Minnions of the Moon 
by William Grey Beyer was $2.50 

SF with a light touch 
Cosmic Engineers 

by Clifford 0. Simak was $2.50 

First rate space opera 
Robots Have No Tails 
by Lewis Padgett was $2.75 

The famous Gallegher stories 
Judgment Night by C. L. Moore was $3.50 
Superb adventure In the future 
Iceworld by Hal Clement was $2.50 

Wonderful alien story 
Typewriter in the Sky & Fear 
by L. Ron Hubbard was $2.75 

Two famous stories from Unknown 
The Mixed Men 

by A. E. Van Vogt was $2.75 

The famous ASF series 
The Castle of Iron by Fletcher Pratt & 

L. Sprague de Camp was $2.50 

The famous Unknown story 
Pattern for Conquest 

by George 0. Smith was $2.50 

First rate space opera. 

Shambleau & Others 

by C. L. Moore was $3.00 

Volume 1 of the famous Northwest 
series 

Northwest of Earth 

by C. L. Moore was $3.00 

Volume 2 of this series 
Mutant by Lewis Padgett was $2.75 

The famous Baldy stories 
Mel Oliver Si Space Rover on Mars 
by William Morrison was $2.50 

Adventure with a circus in space 
The Complete Book of Outer Space 
by Ley, von Braun etc. was $2.50 

Symposium of space travel over 
200 Illustrations 

The Starmen by Leigh Brackett was $2.75 
Adventure In space 

THE GNOME PRESS INC. 

80 East 11th Street 
New York 3, N. Y. 

Ash for our illustrated list and newspaper. 



86 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



one across 

By ARTHUR SELLINGS 



Illustrated by CAL 



Doing puzzles is an escape, 
eh? Then how was it Norman 
found himself so boxed in? 



Tt ' 



ELL, you took me 
for better or for 
worse, Norman 
answered without turning from 
the paper-littered table. And you 
knew about it before you took 
me. 



Ella smothered a sigh. Not 
even feminine logic could refute 
that one. What she hadnt known 
beforehand was the fiendish in- 
genuity of crossword compilers. 



After all, she had reasoned, a 
square was a square and words 
were words. There was a limit to 
both, and a limit to the interest a 
grown man should find in them. 

A year of marriage had taught 
her otherwise. In good wifely 
fashion, she had tried to work up 
an intelligent interest in the 
things herself. But by the time 
shed grasped what a cryptic clue 
was, that bender you can take a 



ONE ACROSS 



87 



child on in four letters could 
only be knee, Norman had moved 
on to skeletons. She struggled 
gamely after, but before shed 
even got the knack of filling the 
blacks in, Norman had discovered 
the delights of coded puzzles. 

It was then that she gave up 
the unequal contest and looked 
on sadly while her husband 
threaded his way into deep and 
deeper mazes  square ones, 
round ones, pyramidal, hexa- 
gonal; literary, zoological, mathe- 
matical; straight, reversed, 
double-clued. 

p'LLA tried to tell herself she 
was lucky, that there were 
worse vices than an addiction to 
crosswords. But sometimes she 
couldnt help feeling lonely and 
resentful. And then, as she just 
had, she protested. 

Its not as if you ever made 
anything out of them, she com- 
plained, returning to the fray. 

Now if one across connects 
with five down, then five down 
connects with eleven through. 
In exactly the same abstracted 
tone, he said, I won a gift certifi- 
cate last year, didnt I? 

And what did you do with it? 
Bought books of puzzles! 

He turned wearily in his chair. 
Please, dear, dont badger me. 
This is the toughest one Ive ever 
tackled. The queerest, too. 
Really, she said, yawning. 



Well, its half-past one. Im going 
to bed. 

Good night, dear, Norman 
said. Ah, thats it  eleven 
through connects with three up. 
His words tailed off into inco- 
herence as he scribbled. 

Ella shrugged hopelessly and 
went to bed. 

And so she missed seeing 

and perhaps it was a good thing 
she did  the fruits of her hus- 
bands toil. 

After half an hour of frenzied 
activity, he laid his pencil aside, 
frowning perplexedly. He was 
sure he had found the key to it. 
He followed his tortuous lines of 
reasoning back, step by step, and 
they checked. There was no doubt 
about it, this was the only possi- 
ble solution. But it didnt fit. 
There had to be four interlocking 
squares, yet how could there be? 
Unless  

Of course! The puzzle was 
four-dimensional. It was one 
across, one down, one through 
and  well, hed have to call it 
one out for the moment. But that 
was it! 

He jumped to his feet in tri- 
urriph. He could see it now. He  
He suddenly experienced a feel- 
ing of vertigo, making him shut 
hs eyes and bring his hand up to 
h;s head. Everything was a yel- 
lowish gray. 

He shouldnt have leaped up 
like that, he told himself. It was 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



having a strange effect on him. 
Geometric patterns flowered and 
dwindled between his eyeballs 
and his closed lids. They were 
like nothing else he had ever 
seen before. Except, perhaps, 
those trick drawings of cubes that 
you cant make up your mind 
whether youre seeing from above 
or below. 

Suddenly the moving patterns 
froze and, the moment after, 
faded away. The dizziness left 
him. He opened his eyes thank- 
fully. 

And he sucked in his breath. 

For he was no longer in his 
own living room, but standing in 
a yellow landscape under a cop- 
per-colored sky. 

TTE SHUT his eyes again hur- 
riedly and thought hard. He 
must have been overdoing his 
solving puzzles lately, he rea- 
soned. That was it  he had 
conked out and been removed to 
the hospital. He was in the 
grounds now. Perhaps he had lost 
his memory for a spell; those 
things happened. 

But everything would be all 
right. Crosswords had taught him 
there was a name for practically 
everything, so there was sure to 
be one for this, some Greek or 
Latin name known to the serious- 
faced specialists who would be 
working on his case this very 
moment. Yes, everything was go- 

ONE ACROSS 



ing to be all right. Of course. 

With a desperate calm, he 
opened his eyes again. 

And>his heart sank. These were 
no hospital grounds. Unless the 
hospital was underneath him. And 
unless it was a special kind of 
place that hung an emerald sun 
up in the sky just to amuse the 
patients. 

Because, for as far as he could 
see, a rolling sea of saffron-colored 
grass stretched away. Between 
gaps in the waves, he could make 
out a green haze on the horizon 
that looked like hills. That was 
all. 

And this was real; he knew it 
in every fiber. He didnt stop to 
reflect how real a thing would 
appear to somebody with delu- 
sions. He knew he wasnt having 
any. And the sound he was sud- 
denly conscious of was no 
delusion, either. A metallic click- 
ing like  like some frightful 
beast sharpening long claws one 
against another. He felt his knees 
weaken. 

The sound came from his left, 
from behnd a hillock. He was 
standing almost on the slopes of 
the hillock, so that it shut out a 
large sector of his view. He lis- 
tened. The creature must be as 
close to the hillock on the other 
side as he was on this. 

He realized with a dreadful 
certainty that there was no sense 
in fleeing  not from an enemy 



88 



89 



he didnt know a thing about. It 
might be able to clear fifty feet 
in one bound, for instance. On the 
other hand, it might have some 
limitation that could be exploited. 
There was only one thing for it. 

Accordingly, he edged his way 
round the intervening lump of 
ground. He came to the rim of it, 
thankful at least that whatever 
it was on the other side seemed 
not to have had the same idea. 
The clicking went on from the 
same direction, sinisterly and 
rhythmically. 

An outcropping of some freak- 
ish crystalline rock made a good 
vantage point. He crouched down, 
his heart thumping wildly, and 
peered round it. 

And there, in that yellow plain, 
under a green sun and a copper 
sky  was an old woman, a 
gentle-looking old soul, rocking 
away in a chair  knitting! 

T he old woman looked up 
suddenly; a pair of beady 
eyes plainly saw him. He stepped 
out from cover. 

The effect on the old lady was 
immediate. Her face broke into 
a toothless grin. \ 

A-ah, she quavered. The col- 
lector. Come here, sir. Ive been 
waiting a long time for you. 
Norman approached her chair 
warily. 

Ive got them all at my cabin, 
she told him excitedly. All 

90 



packed and ready. Two hundred 
and thirty-five. 

Two hundred and thirty-five 
what? Norman asked in a daze. 

Why, chest protectors, of 
course. Her old eyes narrowed. 
Wait, maybe youre a Rebel spy. 
Ive heard tales of spies. 

Norman looked around baf- 
fledly. Startled by the incongruity 
of a quite mad, but otherwise 
ordinary enough old woman in 
the midst of this utterly strange 
landscape, he hadnt noticed what 
else might be visible on this side 
of the hillock. 

His numbed mind took in sev- 
eral things now. One was a cluster 
of cabins, white-painted and as 
ordinary as the old woman. An- 
other was more people. His im- 
mediate attention was taken by 
one striding purposefully toward 
him. It was a woman, clad in 
blouse and jodhpurs. The face, 
though young, looked as func- 
tional as the outfit. 

She halted, a couple of feet 
away, looking him over as if he 
were a horse. Then, before he 
could frame the questions he was 
bursting to ask, she said abruptly, 
Anagram of cart horse. 

Even in such bewildering cir- 
cumstances, it was almost reflex 
for Norman. Why  er  or- 
chestra. 

The girl nodded approvingly 
and stuck out a hand. At last! 
Id begun to give up hope. My 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




E ACROSS 



91 



names Miss Hoff. Miss Hoff. 
Happy to meet you, Norman 
replied automatically. Mines 
Norman Woods. 

The old woman pricked up her 
ears. Woods, you say, son? Not 
kin of Colonel Woods of the Fifth 
New York Cavalry by any 
chance? 

The girl drew Norman away. 
She thinks the Civil Wars still 
on. Its best to leave her alone. 
Civil War? Norman echoed. 
Then this is an asylum? 

Asylum? said Miss Hoff. 
Heavens, no! Youre in another 
dimension, thats all. 

Thats all! He looked around 
wildly. Look, Ive got to get 
back! I   

Ijr E BROKE off. Miss Hoff was 
shaking her head slowly. 
There is no way back, Mr. 
Woods. 

But there has to be. His voice 
started to spiral up toward hys- 
teria. This is all a dream. Yes, 
thats it. Ill wake up in a minute 
and   

Steady, steady, said Miss 
Hoff. Dont disappoint me. You 
dont want to get like him, do 
you? 

Norman was aware of an old 
man, dressed in ancient breeches 
and buckled shoes. As he ambled 
past, Norman distinctly heard 
him muttering, Where are they? 
I just walked round em and they 



vanished. What have they done 
with the horses? 

Norman blinked and stared in 
the wake of the old man. Hed 
heard of him. But it couldnt be. 
That had been  how many 
years ago?  a couple of cen- 
turies or more. 

Bathursts always looking for 
the horses, Miss Hoff said con- 
temptuously. At least old Mrs. 
Lockhart hasnt let it shake her 
from what she thinks is still her 
duty. It just demonstrates the su- 
perior adaptability of the female. 
Have it your way, Norman 
said impatiently. But will you 
kindly tell me just what I have 
to adapt myself to? How did I 
get here? And you? And the 
others? 

How? Because of visualization 
while following some intricate 
line of thought. I, for example, 
was working out a complex 
theorem in higher mathematics. 
Mrs. Lockhart was knitting com- 
forts for the troops. Unfortunate- 
ly she chose a rather complicated 
pattern. As for Bathurst, heaven 
knows what he was working out. 
I gave up asking long ago. 

But how can we all be here at 
the same time? Norman ob- 
jected. Somebody from the 
eighteenth Century and somebody 
from Civil War times  and us? 
He laughed raggedly. Or did you 
come from Ancient Rome? 

Miss Hoff looked at him frigid- 



ly. I was born in 1893. I was 
translated in 1906. I was some- 
thing of a child prodigy. The 
reason we can all be here at the 
same time is that time goes at 
only about a quarter of its normal 
rate in this world. 

But how is it you  almost 
seemed to be expecting me? And 
that anagram business, what was 
that? A password or something? 
Miss Hoff smiled enigmatically. 
That can wait for the time be- 
ing. Let me show you around our 
little settlement first. Oh, this is 
Jimmy. She turned to a vacant- 
looking youth who had just come 
out of one of the cabins. Say 
hello to Mr. Woods, Jimmy. Hes 
new here. 

The youth looked at Norman 
for an uncomprehending moment, 
then shuffled on. 

A sad case of mental retard- 
ment, Miss Hoff commented. 
But hes willing enough. 

But how did he get across? I 
thought you said it was a matter 
of the mind being engaged in a 
complex problem. 

M ISS HOFF stopped and fixed 
him with a steady eye. 
That is something Ive never 
been able to explain. Perhaps 
theres a certain trigger level, 
higher or lower according to the 
mentality of the individual. Any- 
way, whatever the cause, the 
effect is a rare one, as witness the 



small number here  only five 
in a century and a half; six now 
with you. And there were only 
one or two before then. I dis- 
interred a few sets of bones to 
check what the natives told me. 

Natives? Norman echoed in 
alarm. What kind of natives? 

Oh, not human ones. But 
friendly. Youll see one soon. 

The tour of inspection took 
little time. The few cabins were 
comfortably, if primitively, fur- 
nished. Miss Hoff led him to her 
own. 

And this is Feen, she said as 
they entered. Hes the only na- 
tive regularly here. The rest are 
busy building the city. 

But Norman wasnt listening; 
he was too busy gaping at the 
creature who stood deferentially 
before them. 

Under a face like the Cheshire 
Cats, the torso was passably hu- 
man. It was the lower appendages 
that were really odd  four 
stumpy legs on which the body 
stood upright as if on an under- 
carriage. 

All done, maam, Feen 
squeaked. 

Good, said Miss Hoff. You 
may go. 

Feen bowed low and retired. 
Miss Hoff gestured to Norman to 
sit down. He did so gratefully. A 
sudden thought occurred to him. 

Wheres the other member of 
the happy band? he asked. 



92 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



ONE ACROSS 



93 



Miss Hoffs face darkened. 
He, Mr. Woods, is a disgrace to 
your sex. He spends all his time 
drinking. 

Norman reflected that Miss 
Hoffs standards seemed alto- 
gether too high. If a man, ma- 
rooned in this outlandish place, 
took to drink, he had every right 
to. How did he get across? he 
asked. 

The same way I did. He was 
a mathematician, too. A fine 
mind. But mind is no good with- 
out strength of character. Her 
eye was on Norman. That is why 
I hope you will prove worthy of 
my trust. 

Look, Norman said, dont 
talk to me of trust. It seems to me 
Im being asked to take a whale 
of a lot on trust myself. For in- 
stance, you told me theres no 
way back. You also told me that 
you came over in 1906. So will 
you tell me how you happen to 
be wearing a nylon blouse? 

H er composure flickered for 
a moment. Then she smiled 
thinly. Very observant of you. 
Im glad you are. But I didnt 
want to explain everything until 
you were in a calmer frame of 
mind. 

And I shant be in that, Nor- 
man told her, until you do ex- 
plain. There is a way back, isnt 
there? 

There is, Mr. Woods. I use it 



to bring back things we need. But 
it only works for me. It needs a 
knowledge of higher math and an 
unusual ability to visualize. You 
have to see your way back. 

I saw my way here, he said 
doggedly. I can see my way 
back. 

She leaned back in her chair. 
Try then. But youll be wasting 
your time. Imagine a forest and 
a thousand and one paths branch- 
ing from Point A. Only one of 
them reaches Point B. A man 
leaving B would be bound to 
reach A. But if he left A to reach 
B, the odds would be a thousand 
to one against him. A poor anal- 
ogy, but it may serve to prove to 
you that a return journey isnt as 
easy as the one here. 

Norman looked at her, his sus- 
picion withering into a despairing 
conviction that she was telling 
the truth. 

Anyway, she went on, youll 
have better things to do. Natur- 
ally, I had a purpose in getting 
you here. 

Getting me here? He stared 
at her. You were expecting me 
then! 

Well, not exactly you, but 
someone. You see, it took a good 
bit of working out. I had some- 
how to lead a mind into the path. 
In the end, I had the idea of 
incorporating it in a crossword 
puzzle. Getting it accepted in the 
paper was the hardest part, but 



94 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



I managed it. You seem to be the 
only one who solved it. 

He gaped at her, then col- 
lapsed, despite himself, in laugh- 
ter. You mean  I won the 
prize? This   He flapped a 
helpless hand. 

Her reaction was plainly dis- 
approving. This, Mr. Woods, is 
worth more than any Earthly 
prize. Here you have a great mis- 
sion. You, young and a man, are 
ideally suited  apart from a 
certain flippancy which I trust 
you will learn to curb. My main 
fear was that only another wom- 
an, or an old man, would have 
solved it. I would have had to try 
again. 

Normans laughter halted. 
How do you mean? 

Because, she said calmly, 
my aim is to build a new world 
here. It must be obvious to you 
that neither of the two males you 
have seen is suitable for the pur- 
pose. And the other one   she 
shuddered  is disgusting. 

I T TOOK several seconds for 
her meaning to grow clear. 
Then he recoiled visibly. 

Miss Hoff looked affronted. 
The notion disturbs you? 

But I  Im married, he 
stuttered, grasping at the first ex- 
cuse handy to avoid the clutches 
of a female as cold and forbidding 
as this. 

Nonsense. Thats in another 



world. She fixed a stern eye on 
him, as if divining the true rea- 
son for his reaction. And you can 
forget all the romantic absurdity 
of the so-called culture you left 
behind. It only diverted energies 
that could be better used in other 
directions, as well as obscuring 
the chaotic state of things there. 
She leaned toward him. Dont 
you see the opportunity here? A 
chance to start all over again, to 
build such a civilization as Earth 
has never known  a rule of the 
intellect. The natives here will 
supply the manual labor gladly. 
Their whole delight in life is 
serving others. In fifty years, we 
can build a Utopia. 

Her eyes gleaming, the severe- 
ly practical Miss Hoff seemed as 
near to emotion as he had yet 
seen her. The trouble was, he 
didnt care for that particular 
emotion. And then a thought 
struck him that filled him with a 
blind and futile rage. 

You fool! he exploded. You 
talk of intellect! Yet you snare 
me, uproot me, for some lunatic 
idea  and all the time it wasnt 
necessary. You could have begun 
your dynasty on Earth. You 
didnt need a man here. 

Do you think it would have 
been so easy? she answered im- 
perturbably. Not with the right 
kind of man, anyway. Besides, it 
wont be just a one-time affair. 
And you will have other duties. 



ONE ACROSS 



95 



such as the upbringing of the 
children. Women will be liber- 
ated in this world. Its laid down 
in the Code of Conduct. But that 
can wait until youve settled 
down. I have gone into the mat- 
ter scientifically. Procreation must 
be undertaken with a quiet mind. 
Norman looked into her face 
and realized that she meant it  
every word of it. She must have 
read it out of books. She had 
grown from child to woman in a 
world cut off from all the pleas- 
ures of civilization. All the time 
she must have been planning to 
this end. It was going to be some 
crackpot Utopia. And what would 
he be to posterity? Norman the 
First? Or Procreating Unit One? 
He shivered. 

"Meanwhile, she said, we eat 
and then to bed. I have a cabin 
prepared for you. 

N orman lay awake for a long 
time, tired though he was, 
pondering on the spot he was in. 
It could have been worse, he 
supposed. Whatever Miss Hoffs 
faults, she seemed to have organ- 
ized things well. The cabins were 
comfortable and pleasant. The 
supper had been uncooked and 
vegetarian  that was also in the 
Code of Conduct, she told him  
but it had been palatable. 

But it was the sheer wrench of 
things that hurt. He was com- 
pletely lacking in any Robinson 



Crusoe aptitudes. His daily round, 
quiet and humble as it may have 
been, had been enough; he had 
been content. He felt a wave of 
self-pity flood through him  a 
heartfelt regret that hed ever set 
eyes on that damned puzzle. 

But it was too late now, he told 
himself. Hed have to accept 
things. The thought that that in- 
cluded mating with the formid- 
able Miss Hoff brought him out 
in a cold sweat. Wait, though! He 
didnt have to play ball! But his 
efforts to tell himself that werent 
very successful. He had a strong 
suspicion that Miss Hoff had 
means of enforcing her will. She 
was sure to have the natives on 
her side. She had probably bought 
them over with baubles she 
brought back from Earth. 

He wondered sleepily what she 
used for money on those trips. 
Perhaps this place was crawling 
with gold; perhaps . 

It seemed that he had only just 
dropped off to sleep when he felt 
a hand shaking him by the shoul- 
der. He blinked up indignantly. 

A man stood over him, holding 
a lantern. 

"Who are you? Norman de- 
manded. 

Ambrose Gedge, the man 
said. I was otherwise engaged 
when you arrived. 

Normans nostrils bore to his 
sleep-fuddled brain a strong 
aroma of alcohol. So this was the 



other member of the settlement. 
Pleased to meet you, he grum- 
bled. But did you have to come 
to say hello in the middle of the 
night? He turned over. 

But I came to say good-by. 
The mans voice was thick. And 
to wish you good luck. Im going 
off to the mountains. I couldnt 
stand the sight of you and  and 
Bertha  together. 

Norman turned back. Bertha? 
Miss Hoff. Gedge, a tubby 
red-faced man, seemed overcome 
with emotion. I envy you your 
luck, old man. 

Luck? Norman echoed. 

Of course. A whole little world 
of your own. And Bertha." He 
sighed. What a type! So proud, 
so masterly. 

M arveling at the wide 

range of peoples tastes, 
Norman stared at him. 

Only one trouble with her, 
Gedge went on, shes too damn 
finicky. First day I was here, I 
thought I was going to have fun 
 but that put Bertha right off; 
Thats what drove me to the bot- 
tle. That put her off even more. 
A vicious circle, my friend. He 
shook his head sadly. I thought 
she was coming round to my way 
of thinking, but then she got this 
crossword plan. Now my chances 
are finished. 

Youre welcome to her, Nor- 
man said, and to this place. Id 



give my right arm to get away. 
You would? Gedge seized 
him by the shoulder. Well, you 
can if you want to. 

Norman jerked upright, blink- 
ing unbelievingly at him. But 
Miss Hoff said it needed higher 
math and visualization. I can vis- 
ualize, but Im not much good at 
math. 

Gedge winked. You can get a 
headache from higher math; you 
can also get it from hitting your- 
self over the head with a mallet. 
Come over to my cabin. Ill show 
you something. 

Wide awake now, Norman 
dressed hurriedly and followed 
Gedge, telling himself not to hope 
too much, that it might all be the 
ravings of a drunk. 

Dawn was breaking. Nobody 
else was in sight. Gedge showed 
Norman into his cabin. He fer- 
reted under his bed, fetched out 
something covered in cloth and 
unwrapped it. 

The first sight of it half-con- 
firmed Normans fears. It was a 
framework of sticks, lashed to- 
gether in a complicated and seem- 
ingly purposeess structure. 

This, said Gedge, is the way 
back. Its a visual aid. Getting 
back is harder, as Bertha prob- 
ably told you. But she doesnt 
know that I found it my way. 
The only thing is that you have 
to get pretty drunk for it to 
work. 



96 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



ONE ACROSS 



97 



Anything, said Norman fer- 
vently. 

Good. Gedge thrust a large 
earthenware bottle at him. Nor- 
man took a gulp and coughed. It 
was fiery stuff. 

Only native rotgut, Im afraid, 
the other said apologetically. 
Bertha refuses to bring me any 
real stuff back with her. 

But cant you bring your own 
back? 

Hah, wish I could. I only tried 
it once. I nearly got arrested back 
there. It seems that when I dis- 
appeared, people thought Id gone 
behind the Iron Curtain. And 
since I was engaged in a secret 
project, that makes it highly un- 
safe to go back. 

1^ ORMAN remembered now 
*- ^ the uproar the case had 
caused several years back. He 
offered his sympathies. 

It was a dogs life anyway, 
Gedge said indifferently. I only 
thought this gadget up so I 
wouldnt be dependent on Bertha 
for supplies. But you get used to 
even to this stuff. Hey, drink 
up! 

Im going as fast as I can, 
said Norman. Im not a drinking 
man. He took another gulp. Is 
it any good trying now? 

Lord, no. Youve got to get 
pickled. Come on, drink. 

Norman dutifully drained the 
bottle. Gedge handed him an- 

98 



other, chuckling. I cant wait to 
see Berthas face when she finds 
youre gone. He treated himself 
to a generous swig at the thought 
I bet shell   

He broke off, startled, as a 
rapping sounded on the door. 

Bertha! he whispered hoarse- 
ly. Quick, hide behind the door. 
Norman jumped to it. Gedge 
opened the door cautiously. 

Ah, your good pardon, sir, 
came a quavering voice. But 
have you seen a coach and 
horses? I was   

Norman heard Gedges breath 
exhaled in a shuddering sigh. 
They went thataway, he said. 

G edge turned back, sweating 
heavily. Come on, drink up. 
Weve got no time to lose. I cant 
stand the strain. 

Norman choked down another 
mouthful. But how do I know 
where Ill get back? I mean he 
disha  hey, hear that? Were 
getting somewhere! But I mean 
he disappeared in Europe. What 
if I turn up in the middle of the 
Atlantic? 

No fear of that, old man. Ive 
mapped out the contangency. All 
of Earth touches only a small 
area here. Where do you want to 
get back to? 

New York. 

Mm  well, we can arrange 
that. Though wed better make 
it out in the country just to be on 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



the safe side. The maps over 
there, under my pillow. Get it, 
will you? 

Norman didnt realize until he 
staggered that this was a test. 

Good, said Gedge. That 
ought to do it. Lets get outside. 
Well take a bottle apiece to 
make sure. 

Though it was quite light now, 
the coast seemed clear as they 
picked their way between the 
dunes. 

Well, take one for the road, 
said Gedge. Now  look at this. 

Norman squinted at the gad- 
get. 

Start from this point. Now 
follow to this one. See? No, dont 
close one eye  that wont do. 
Now follow from one point to the 
next. 

Norman did as he was told. 
But all he felt was dizziness. Its 
no good, he said after a couple 
of minutes effort. 

Keep at it, Gedge said. 
Wait   he cocked an ear  
what was that? No, keep on 
looking. He lurched over to the 
outcropping of rock and peered 
around it. _ 

He turned back instantly, his 
face white. For heavens sake, 
hurry! Its Bertha. She must have 
missed you. 

Norman tried again. From one 
joint of the gadget to the next, 
his eyes followed feverishly. His 
head spun. Its no good, he 

ONE ACROSS 



groaned. He staggered. And then 
he seemed to be falling, falling . 

T he NEXT he knew, he was 
staring blearily up at a blue- 
uniformed figure. 

Where am I? he asked weakly. 
Youre in South Orange police 
station, bud. Boy, were you tight! 
Youll have some explaining to 
do to the judge in the morning. 
Judge? said Norman joyous- 
ly. He was back then! 

He struggled to a sitting posi- 
tion, but the effort was too brutal. 
He raised a hand to his splitting 
head. 

The cop looked at him oddly. 
Well, if the thought of the judge 
makes you so happy, youll like 
knowing that you have some ex- 
plaining to do -before you meet 
him. The calls been out for you 
for two days. The little ladys on 
her way here now. 

Two days? Of course, the time 
rate. But Ella? How could he 
start explaining? 

Seems she left you doin a 
crossword puzzle or somethin. 
The cop scratched his head. Ive 
heard of queer things drivin a 
man to drink, but   

That was the last time, said 
Norman devoutly. Never again. 
Yeah, thats what they all 
say. 

I didnt mean drinking, said 
Norman. 

ARTHUR SELLINGS 
99 




YOUR SINS AND MINE by 
Taylor Caldwell. Gold Medal 
Books, 25c 

IITISS Caldwell has still not 
written a science fiction 
book. Instead, this is pure fan- 
tasy, envisioning a near future in 
which God is fed up with the mur- 
derous antics of Man and poisons 
the Earth against him. There is 
no rain and nothing edible will 
grow. The fertile lands are over- 
grown with a weed that harbors a 
huge poisonous insect whose bite 
is fatal. Food supplies are being 
rapidly depleted. 

100 



The situation is worldwide, but 
censorship in the various coun- 
tries prohibits the printing of any 
information. Delegates still argue 
in the United Nations, A- and H- 
bombs are still boastfully ex- 
ploded. 

The story is told by a young 
married veteran whose father, a 
patient. Joblike tower of strength, 
is the only one who recognizes the 
pestilence as Divine Retribution. 
Maybe you or I would quibble 
with Miss Caldwells picture of 
Earth abandoned and the be- 
havior of the starving populace 
or the idea of Divine Retribution. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 






However, many stretches of the 
book have a Biblical power. 

All in all, a disturbing plea for 
sanity and peace. No argument 
there, at least. 

REPORT ON THE STATUS 
QUO by Terence Roberts. Merlin 
Press, Inc., $2.50 

T he title is completely descrip- 
tive of the book. This strange, 
yet amusing little story is written 
in the form of a report by the sec- 
retary of the Combined Scientific 
Societies of the U. S. A. to the 
Secretary of Science, evidently a 
new Cabinet post, on April 16, 
1961. 

It concerns the Status Quo, but 
not Ihe one we are familiar with, 
being a preliminary account in 
advance of the full scientific re- 
ports of the events that led to the 
disorganization of the world. 

It appears that in 1958 and 59, 
while the rest of the world was 
busily engaged in WW III, an 
unprecedented rainy dry season 
as well as a very rainy rainy sea- 
son washed away the topsoil of 
the Hinche Plateau in the in- 
terior of Haiti. The bluish Nitro- 
earth thus exposed is the cause 
of all the trouble. It is Mesozoic 
in origin, having been covered 
these past millions of years, but 
nowhere on Earth so close to the 
surface as in this spot in Haiti. 
Due to the global preoccupa- 

     SHELF 



tion with the war, no one except 
James Carstairs, a sociologist, and 
Sylvia Rendle, a journalist, who 
were unfortunate enough to be 
marooned on the plateau for a 
year, realized that Man was about 
to lose his unchallenged grip on 
the planet. Exposed to the revita- 
lizing sunshine, the Nitro-earth is 
giving up its hoarded store of 
dinosaur eggs and parasitic dis- 
eases which disappeared millions 
of years ago. 

The report is a personalized ac- 
count of the beginning of this 
struggle against Nature. Very im- 
pressive, too, both in scholarship 
and tension. 

THE EDGE OF THE SEA by 
Rachel Carson. Houghton Mifflin 
Co., $3.95 

W iERE I live  Far Rocka- 
way, on Long Island, N. Y. 
we have more sea than any- 
thing else except trouble with the 
L. I. R. R. Of the two. Ill take the 
sea any time  especially the sea 
as Rachel Carson describes it 
Miss Carson takes us into 
many of her intimate seashore 
spots and shows us wonders 
there that we never would suspect 
existed in such barren surround- 
ings. 

I recall one day this year that 
my kids and I watched a tremen- 
dous horde of egg-shaped mole 
crabs, uprooted by successive 




101 




waves, burrowing simultaneously 
until, in a flash, there was nothing 
to be seen but sand and a reced- 
ing wave, leaving a sense of illu- 
sion. From Miss Carsons descrip- 
tion of these creatures, I would 
swear that she was looking over 
my shoulder and reading my re- 
actions. 

It is a fascinating book that has 
us waiting impatiently for warm 
weekends to return so that we can 
discover other marvels for our- 
selves. It is also a beautiful book, 
with excellent illustrations by 
Bob Hines of U. S. Fish 8s Wild- 
life Service on almost every page. 
It doesnt have the sweep and 
grandeur of The Sea Around Us, 
but neither does its subject mat- 
ter. Its a homy book about salt- 
water neighbors. 

GUIDE TO THE STARS by 
Hector MacPherson. Philosophi- 
cal Library, $2.75 

^^HIS is for the beginner and a 
fine broth of a book Dr. Mac- 
Pherson has written, too. In sim- 
ple, clear fashion, it takes the 
novice through the heavens, start- 
ing with the Northern Stars, 
which change position least 
throughout the year. From them, 
after pointing out unmistakable 
signposts, he proceeds to the con- 
stellations, taking them one by 
one and listing the items of in- 
terest in each, following the sea- 



sonal changes of the sky. 

An added bonus is a section of 
star maps at the end, which delin- 
eates the important constellations 
and denotes the magnitude of the 
constituent stars. 



FRONTIERS OF ASTRONO- 
MY by Fred Hoyle. Harper & 
Brothers, $5.00 



A handsome and fascinating 
book indeed. The style is 
attractive and often witty, espe- 
cially in the information and the- 
ories the author blithely tosses 
about. Naturally you know that 
Mother Earth is now thought to 
be four billion years old instead 
of two  but that means that the 
gal weve been stuck on all our 
life turns out to be twice as old 
as we thought. 

Not only did Hoyle disillusion 
me thusly, but he claims that the 
Earth did not start out as a mol- 
ten sphere, as we had been taught, 
but as an agglomeration of cold 
bodies that stuck together and 
gradually squeezed the lighter el- 
ements to the surface. 

He also theorizes that hydro- 
carbons existed before the Earth 
and that far more is trapped be- 
low the surface than is suspected. 

Hoyle really comes into his 
own, though, on the cosmic scale 
with the generation of galaxies! 

The book pictorially is on the 
same grand scale as the text, with 



102 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



almost fifty exceptional photos 
by the largest instruments extant, 
as well as numerous line draw- 
ings. 

REVOLT ON ALPHA C by 
Robert Silver berg. Thomas Y. 
Crowell Company, $2.00 

T his is a book that I would 
have liked when I was a 
youngster. Silverberg knows his 
audience and theyre his equals, 
as they should be, while he re- 
lates his fast-moving story of a 
new space cadet caught up in a 
series of events that prove al- 
most too much for his divided 
loyalty. 

Larry Stark is the cadet, son 
of a commander in the Patrol and 
convinced through his training 
that Earth can do no wrong, that 
even the Jovian colonial revolt, 
quelled bloodily by Terra, was in 
no way caused by Earth. 

His friend on his shakedown 
cruise to Alpha Centauri is a Mar- 
tian youth, loyal to the Patrol but 
wise enough to see the justice of 
the colonies position. 

When they arrive at Alpha C 
IV, they find that three of the 
four settlements have revolted 
against Earth rule. And when 
Larry sees banners with slogans 
like No Taxation without Rep- 
resentation, they awaken in him 
an understanding of history that 
kids will excitedly share. 



MARTIN AND HIS FRIEND 
FROM OUTER SPACE by Ivo 
Duka and Helena Kolda. Harper 
8s Brothers, $2.50 

T his book could be a transcrip- 
tion of any modern childs 
dreams. It was almost impossible 
for me to tear it it of the avid 
hands of my family in order to 
do this review. 

An average boy, Martin, who 
could be you  at an early age, 
of course  builds himself a con- 
traption of tin-foil, candy boxes, 
radio tubes, Slinky the spring and 
his Space Helmet. Only, Joy of 
Joys, it works! 

He establishes communication 
with a golden-haired beauty from 
Marinoid, Saturns Moon of the 
Sea, on which there is no solid 
land. They make a date to meet 
at Battery Park via matter trans- 
ference and then proceed to have 
one heckuva adventurous day at 
Coney Island. 

Martins broke, but his gal is 
a real golden-hair. They hock a 
lock, attracting the greedy atten- 
tion of a lurking cad who chases 
them throughout the day for the 
gold of her hair. Martin thwarts 
the blackguard in true Boy-hero 
style. 

The photos by Miss Kolda are 
done in wonderful keeping with 
the joyful make-believe spirit of 
the book. 

 FLOYD C. GALE 



     SHELF 



103 




Slave Ship Conclusion 

By FREDERIK POHL 
Here was the end product of this war that 
was not a war  on entire naval task force 
to protect some dogs and apes and seals! 




SYNOPSIS 

L ogan moeller is my 

name, Lieutenant, j.g., UJf. 
Naval Reserve. I was a 
combat officer of the line in what 
we laughingly called the Cold 
War  laughingly because, with a 
million casualties a year, it wasnt 
very cold; and because, when you 
stopped and looked around, it 
wasnt exactly a war. How can 
you have a war without an en- 
emy? 

The Caodais werent a coun- 
try; they were a religion that had 
swept up out of Indo-China, over- 
run Asia, Oceania and Africa, and 
were obviously well on the way 
to adding the rest of the world. 
You cant declare war on a reli- 
gion, can you? And so it wasnt 
war, but meanwhile we fought 
and died and took prisoners. 

Elsie, for instance, was only 
one prisoner out of hundreds of 

Illustrated by EMSH 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 







thousands  but she was the one 
that counted with me because she 
was my wife. She had volunteered, 
months before the universal draft 
could have caught her, and she 
had been captured. While I was 
on combat duty at sea, it wasnt 
so bad  I had other things on my 
mind. But then I was transferred 
 to a strange shore station: 

Project Mako, where it 
seemed COMINCH wanted us to 
learn how to talk to animals. 
What did they have to do with 
i fighting the Caodais? 

Senior Lieutenant Semyon 
Ilyitch Timayazev, late of Kras- 






K '"ritx-- ' 







J -i, 



SLAVE SHIP 



105 



noye Armee, now, since the Red 
Army no longer existed, a mili- 
tary attache of the Peoples Dem- 
ocratic Tsarist Republican Rus- 
sian Government-in-Exile, was as- 
signed to Project Mako because, 
apparently, his mother had been 
one of Pavlovs assistants decades 
before. With him, I managed to 
get somewhere with the actual 
task of manning a fighting sub- 
marine with animals and it began 
to seem that our project might 
get somewhere. But the Cold War 
suddenly began hotting up. Worst 
of all was something called: 

The Glotch  unidentified 
ballistic phenomenon, presumably 
hostile. It was a kind of radiation 
burn that killed, almost every 
time, and it struck anywhere. If 
the Caodais had a weapon like 
that, it was the end of the war  
unless we could knock out that 
weapon. So reasoned COMINCH 
and he plucked Semyon and me 
and half a dozen of our animals 
out of Project Mako and put us 
on a task force to strike at what 
Intelligence believed to be Cao- 
dai headquarters for the new wea- 
pon. Our objective was Madagas- 
car  and Elsie was interned on 
Zanzibar, and the map showed it 
to be only a hair away. But there 
was a girl, a commissioned strip- 
per in a government - operated 
nightclub nearby, where she had 
been named: 

Nina Merriam; now she 
106 



turned up again  no longer com- 
missioned but an enlisted woman, 
no longer a stripper but a mess 
attendant in the aircraft carrier 
Monmouths wardroom  and no 
longer named Nina Merriam! I 
dragged her to the executive offi- 
cers cabin to have her arrested as 
a spy, but general quarters sound- 
ed; we were in Caodai waters and 
a bandit flotilla showed up in our 
sonars! 

XIV 

rpHE LIEUTENANT was on 
his way to his battle station 
before the klaxon had stopped 
blaring. The exec was a moment 
slower, but not because he was 
paying any attention to us. He 
bellowed something into his in- 
tercom, listened for a second, bel- 
lowed again, and was gone. There 
was no one left but the girl and 
me. 

She said urgently: Let me go. 
Lieutenant! Youve got this all 
wrong. Ive got to get out of here 
and   

I said; Shut up! I was feeling 
jittery. General quarters is a pow- 
erful voice of command. I had no 
battle station on Monmouth; I 
was supercargo, as useless in an 
engagement and as undesirable as 
the wardroom silver the old sur- 
face ships used to jettison before 
a fight. 

But I didnt want to be useless; 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



I wanted to respond to the alarm, 
and all I could do was stay here 
and look ugly at a young girl. 
Bandits in fleet strength! It wasnt 
even a wanderer on picket duty 
or a cruising raider that we might 
hope to swamp before it could 
' transmit a signal. It meant fleet 
action if they spotted us  and we 
I were big enough for anyone to 
1 spot. 

I felt the angle of the deck 
change and, simultaneously, a 
{ slowing in the throb of the screws. 
I could see in my mind just what 
was happening: We were rebal- 
lasting our tanks, tipping our div- 
ing fins, slowing our propellers to 
a gentle wash as we headed for 
the bottom. 

Under a good thick blanket of 
the dense, cold Antarctic Deep 
water, we might not be spotted. 
Sonar echoes took odd bounces 
off the interfaces between layers 
of water of differing densities and 
of all the water in the Earths 
oceans, Antarctic Deep made the 
sharpest, cleanest interface. That 
much, at least, was good. 

T he girl was saying: I tell 
you one more time. Lieuten- 
ant  get out of my way. Thats a 
direct order! 

What? I stared at tier. I was 
between her and the door, and I 
was going to stay there. It would 
have been nice if I had had a 
weapon. I felt a little foolish. 



standing there with  my bare 
hands hanging at my sides, but of 
course I shouldnt really need any 
more than bare hands to subdue 
a hundred-and-five-pound girl. I 
said: Fd appreciate it if youd 
shut up until the exec gets back. 
But youre not leaving here, un- 
derstand that. 

Im not a Cow-dye, you idiot! 
Im Nina Willette of Navy Intelli- 
gence and youre keeping me 
from the most important job Ive 
ever done! 

she took a deep breath and 
fought for control of herself. She 
was, all at once, superbly beauti- 
ful as she stood glaring at me, her 
shoulders thrown back, her eyes 
filled with fury, and I suppose she 
knew it very well. They are ac- 
tors by trade, these cloak-and- 
dagger people; how was a simple 
line officer like myself to know 
whether she was telling the truth 
or not? 

She said, with an effort: Look, 
Lieutenant, Ill explain it to you. 
Im Counter-intelligence. I was on 
security duty when I was a strip- 
per at Boca Raton. Im on secu- 
rity duty now. There are paci- 
fists in Monmouths complement, 
Moeller! Do you know what that 
means? Right now, were at battle 
stations. This is the time when I 
ought to be out on the prowl, 
making sure everybodys at his 
station, looking for trouble before 
it starts  and Im here waiting 



SLAVE SHIP 



107 



for a fat-headed j.g. to make up 
his mind to let me go. Get out of 
my way! 

Good try, I said, but I was 
shaken. Stay where you are. 
Well, she was some kind of 
spy or counter-spy, but she was 
only a girl, and a small one and a 
young one at that. All of a sud- 
den, her eyes filled with tears. She 
sobbed and leaned blindly for- 
ward; instinctively, I reached out 
to help her. She clung to me, 
weeping, and it was like holding 
a fragrant, sad flower. 

I hadnt known that enlisted 
women used perfume. The exec 
and the encroaching Caodais 
seemed very remote and I found 
myself patting her head and say- 
ing soothing things. 

And then the roof fell in. 

T CAME to with a lump behind 
my right ear and there was no 
one in the execs office but me; 
Nina whatever - her - name - was 
was gone. Lord knows what she 
hit me with, but it was nothing to 
what the exec hit me with when 
he came back for a brief racing 
second and found me standing 
dopily in the middle of the floor. 
I dont suppose he said more than 
twenty words to me, but every 
one of them dug deep under the 
skin and festered. 

It seems that she was indeed 
Naval Intelligence. And a full 
commander at that. 

lOS 



I saluted empty air; he was 
gone already. It seemed like a 
good place to be out of, so I left. 
In any case, even though I didnt 
have a real battle station, there 
was a place where I was supposed 
to be. 

Semyon and I had been as- 
signed a whaleboat, deep in the 
lower decks of the carrier, far be- 
low even the aircraft hangars, be- 
low the engineering sections, in 
the steel belly of the ship, sur- 
rounded by jet fuel for the air- 
craft and diesel oil for the torps 
and auxiliaries. It was where the 
animals were kept, for the whale- 
boat would be our assault vessel 
for the landing on Madagascar  
if we ever got that far. And it 
was where I was supposed to be 
in any action. 

I headed for it through the 
roaring tumult of a capital ship 
at general quarters. There was 
plenty of noise aboard Monmouth 
just then, but it was mostly vocal 
 the racket of the loud-hailers, 
the sharp orders of the officers 
with working parties, the rattle of 
sighting orders as I passed the 
fire-control compartments. 

But the engines were a gentle 
whisper, barely enough to main- 
tain steerage way. For human 
voices would not penetrate the 
ships hull to give us away to the 
enemies around us in the dense, 
chill water draining off the Ant- 
arctic ice pack, but the sounds of 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



our screws most surely would. We 
were well into the Indian Ocean, 
surrounded by Caodai Africa, 
Caodai Asia and the inhospitable 
ice. The Caodais thought of it as 
their private lake, as we did the 
Caribbean, and with just as much 
reason. Even if the sighted Cao- 
!dai vessels missed us, there would 
be others. 

Of course, we did have the cur- 
tain of the thermoplane over our 
heads and that was a help. But it 
iwas as helpful to the Caodais now 
as to us. I was sympathizing with 
the men at the sonar stations, 
pinging into the dark deeps, chart- 
ing and weighing the echoes that 
came back. There would be a 
vhgue splash of light in the sonar 
screen, warped by distance, al- 
most obliterated by the thermo- 
' plane. Was it a blue whale, a 
school of fish  or a Caodai sub? 

Our real advantage was that 
 we could fairly assume any sight- 
ing was a sub, whereas they might 
not expect to find us here. 

S EMYON WAS already in the 
whaleboat. He was sitting 
with the puppies in his lap, talk- 
ing nervously tP Josie. He blinked 
at me as I slid in through the en- 
trance hatch. 

He scrambled to his feet and 
then: Oh, he said in relief, it is 
you, Logan. I did not know but 
perhaps it was an admiral. In 
Krasnoye Armee   



  ^there were no admirals, I 
finished for him. Are the animals 
all right? 

Oh, he said dourly, they will 
perhaps survive, if the rest of us 
do. Have you news, Logan? Are 
we to be in combat? 

Cant you hear the squawk- 
box? 

It was rattling a repetition of 
what it had been saying, at inter- 
vals, ever since the first alarm: 
Remain at stations. We have lost 
sonar contact, but the audic listen- 
ing posts indicate the enemy still 
on course. Which meant that we 
had stopped pinging the waters 
for fear of having them hear our 
own sonars, but our directional 
microphones had a fix on the Cao- 
dai screws, not muffled as ours 
were because, it appeared, they 
did not know we were around. 

That was good. Now if only 
they didnt close to a point where 
even the curtain between the 
dense, cold water and the bottom 
and the lighter, warmer, saltier 
layers above no longer screened 
us from their sonars. 

Semyon sat down and lifted 
the puppies into his lap. He 
clucked over them and petted 
them. Always jumping up and 
down, he complained. Is never 
a moment to sit, or to play chess, 
or merely to think. Ah, Irkutsk, 
if only I could see you once again! 
How precious the memory   
His voice trailed off; he was 



SLAVE SHIP 



109 



i 



staring past me at the entrance 
hatch. I turned and there was 
Nina Willette-or-whatever. She 
had with her the surly officer 
named Wilmington and she also 
had a wide-mouthed, dangerous- 
looking gim in her hand. 

I said dazedly, Lieutenant Ti- 
mayazev. Commander Willette. 

Semyon pushed the puppies off 
his lap and stood up to give her a 
ramrod Red Army salute, hand 
twanging wide at the temple like 
the ancient Coldstream Guards. 
But he glanced at me inquiringly 
at the same time. 

I started to explain, but the girl 
cut me off. Inside, Winnington, 
she said, and gestured with the 
gun. And to me: Sorry to barge 
in like this, but I had to get him 
out of the way. Theyd tear him 
to pieces back in the fire-control 
room. 

^INNINGTON ONLY looked 
 even more sullen. He walked 
casually over to the navigators 
desk, pushed Josie onto the floor 
and sat. Youve got no right to 
do this, he observed flatly. 

No rightl she blazed, but 
Semyon outblazed her. 

SvoloctU he roared at Win- 
nington. Leave dog alone! She 
was not hurting you, the dog! 
Josie whined her complaints; and 
then, as she caught the timbre of 
her bosss voice, barked threaten- 
ingly: Go away! Go away! 



Winnington looked more 
alarmed at Semyon and the dog 
than he had at Ninas gun. Get 
these characters off me, he ap- 
pealed to her. 

I ought to let the dog take a 
bite, she answered. But well 
save you for better things. She 
sat down, looking drained, and 
glanced at me. Congratulations, 
Lieutenant, she said. You al- 
most loused things up, but not 
quite. I got to Winnington just 
as he was about to pull the trig- 
ger on the Caodais. 

He said matter - of -factly: I 
was setting up range and vectors. 
Thats all. I wouldnt have fired 
without an order. 

She laughed. Of course not 
And youre not a pacifist, either, 
are you? 

Pacifist? I said, shocked. And 
Semyon blared: Patchifist? This 
one, a patchifist? Logan, leave me 
turn Josie loose on him! Is first 
patchifist I have ever in ihy 
whole life seen! 

Lay off, I begged him. Tell 
me about it Nina  Commander, 

I mean. 

Nina will do, she said wea- 
rily. Thats all there is to tell. I 
was assigned to keep an eye on 
him; hes been under surveillance 
for a long time. But hes smart. 
He didnt make a move-rruntil it 
could be a big one. If I had been 
five seconds later, he would have 
salvoed his whole battery at the 



Caodais  and they would have 
blown us right out of the water 
ten minutes later. 

Winnington laughed sharply, 
but he didnt say anything. He 
was watching Semyon, cradling 
Josie in his arms and murmuring 
to her in Dog, with what ap- 
peared to be genuine amusement. 

A pacifist! Id seen traces of 
their work, a newspaper report of 
a time bomb at the Caodai lega- 
tion, an Army installation myste- 
riously ablaze, but as far as I 
knew, I had never seen one in the 
flesh. And here was Winnington, 
my surly bridge partner of the 
wardroom, revealed as an authen- 
tic pacifist! It was like seeing a 
cobra emerging from a washstand 
drain  the essence of evil where 
only familiar and safe things 
f should be. 

I started to question her, but 
the rattle of the loud-hailers in 
the passageway stopped me. 
There was a new tone to the 
bridge talkers voice: Attention 
on deck! All hands to Condition 
Baker! Bandits past closest point 
of contact and holding steady on 
course. And then, humanly: 
They missed us! 

YOU see, patchifist, Sem- 
^ yon said nastily, you have 
lost your chance! 

Leave him alone, I told him. 
There was tramping and talking 
in the passageways as the dam- 

SIAVE SHIP 



age-control parties came up from 
the fuel tanks, where they had 
been waiting for possible Caodai 
hits and almost certain cremation 
if one occurred. They looked 
hardly human in their anti-flash 
face paint and heavy hoods. Josie, 
spying them from the entrance 
hatch, barked like a rabid animal. 

Hush! said Semyon to her, 
and repeated the order in Dog 
whine. 

I asked Nina Willette: Now 
what? Do you want me to escort 
you back to the execs office with 
this one? 

Give us ten minutes, she said. 
Let them cool off a little. We 
pretty near had a lynching when 
I arrested him. 

Winnington might not even 
have heard her; he continued to 
watch Semyon try to soothe the 
disturbed dogs, still with the air 
of amused detachment. He bent 
over casually to remove one of 
the puppies from his shoes and 
Josie, the vigilant mother, sprang 
for him. 

Semyon made a grab and 
caught her, yipping, by the tail, 
while the puppies clamored at 
him. Tortune pulverize the for- 
tune-pulverized beasts! Semyon 
snarled. Hush, now! Hush! And 
he went on to bawl them out in 
Dog. 

Nina said approvingly: He 
barks like a native. Semyon 
glowered at her briefly. But only 



110 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



111 



briefly, because no mere human 
distraction could keep him from 
animals. 

All right, all right! he said, in 
a mock-furious motherly growl. 
Semyon will tell you a story. Be 
calm! A nice story, I promise it. 
He had spoken in English, but the 
dogs, and even the seals behind 
their bars, reacted at once. Ap- 
parently they recognized the 
word story, which told me a lit- 
tle something I hadnt known be- 
fore about why Semyon so fre- 
quently slipped back to the ani- 
mal quarters for a few moments 
before he went to bed. 

Winnington stared in disgusted 
unbelief and Nina almost explod- 
ed. Well, it was a mad sight: 
There were the animals, yapping 
with joy; there was Semyon, ob- 
livious of us all; and there were 
Nina and Winnington, watching 
a full-grown fighting man tell bed- 
time stories to a brood of animals. 
It must have been even funnier 
to them than it was to me. 

CEMYON HAD a mixed audi- 

ence. It was like tucking a six- 
year-old and a three-year-old into 
bed at the same time. One story 
will more or less do for both of 
them, but the differences in vo- 
cabulary mean you have to dou- 
ble up on the story as you go 
along  something like the facing 
Hebrew and English pages in the 
Holy Book they read from at the 

m 



Christmas Feast of Lights. 

Semyon squatted down among 
the dogs, next to the seal pen, and 
then it was a steady stream of 
bark-whine-sniff-and-twitch, shiv- 
er-and-whine, grimace-and-growl. 
The animals were delighted; they 
followed the story with frantic 
absorption. 

And Nina was delighted, too. 
After the first incredulous stare, 
she stuffed a handkerchief to her 
mouth and kept it there, eyes on 
Semyon. She managed not to 
laugh out loud, which is more 
than I could say for Winnington. 

But Semyon was oblivious. It 
was the longest monologue in any 
animal tongue I have ever heard, 
and I realized that it accounted 
for a lot in the comparative flu- 
ency Semyon had over me in 
talking with the dogs; it must 
have been splendid practice. I 
watched him admiringly as he 
improvised substitutes for words 
that did not exist, wagging the tail 
he didnt have, making the croupy 
barks that are Seal punctuation. 
When he finished, the animals 
applauded wildly. 

And so did Nina. Thank you 
very much, she said sincerely, 
regaining her self-control. 

Semyon asked suspiciously: 
For what, thanks? 

For telling us the story of Lit- 
tle Red Riding Hood. I wouldnt 
have missed it for the world. 

He looked puzzled. Oh, no, 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Commander. Was not Riding 
Hood. How would that be tactful? 
Was Goldilocks and Three Bears, 
dont you see? 

He stopped, indignant; Nina 
had lost her self-control com- 
pletely on that one. And when she 
laughed, that broke me up. 

But it didnt last. Nina stopped 
short and blinked at me. What 
was that? 

I felt it, too. The deck pulsed 
underneath us. A pause, and it 
pulsed again, as though a blue 
whale were nuzzling playfully up 
to Monmouth. 

But it was no whale, I knew. I 
had felt the same gentle pulsing 
on Spruance', I knew the feel of 
the recoil as a ships main batter- 
ies loosed against an enemy. 

Winnington grated triumphant- 
ly: Caught me, did you? But 
maybe there was somebody you 
missed! 

Someone had salvoed a burst 
of at least a dozen missiles. If we 
had been hiding, we werent hid- 
ing any more; those missiles were 
laid on course at the fat and ig- 
norant Caodais as they waddled 
blissfully away from us. 

But they wouldnt be waddling 
any more. 

XV 

I T WAS bad. Worse than we 
figured. While the four of us 
and the animals waited in the 



whaleboat, the loud-hailers roared 
orders and the ship lurched con- 
tinually against the recoil of mis- 
siles leaving for Caodai targets. 
And then there was a shudder 
that was not a missile leaving the 
tubes. 

A Caodai torpedo had ex- 
ploded against our deflection net, 
close enough to jar us all, and 
then another, and more, and one 
final one that was not against the 
net but against the hull of Mon- 
mouth. 

We were hit, and badly. 

And even that was not^the end. 

Monmouth took six direct hits 
by my own count, standing help- 
less in the whaleboat. The ship 
was hurt. Our lights failed and 
then went on again as the secon- 
dary circuits cut in. The secon- 
daries failed and our own whale- 
boat batteries lit the little cabin 
as I cut in the sealer switches. 
Outside in the passageways, there 
was no power at all, at least in 
our deep)-laid section of the keel- 
son, but from far away I could 
hear the rattle of the loud-hailers, 
and what they snapped out sharp- 
ly was: 

All auxiliaries abandon ship! 
All auxiliaries abandon ship! 

And that was the beginning of 
long hours of death-in-life for the 
four of us. 

We hugged the bottom, squat- 
ted there and waited. 

Crippled Monmouth was still 



SLAVE SHIP' 



113 



fighting. We could hear the dis- 
tant explosions; but there wasnt 
anything we could do about it. 
Communication was impossible; 
the deeps were shuddering with 
explosions enough to drown out 
any call. To fight was out .of the 
question: Our whaleboat had no 
armament, for the space for the 
missile rackets and projectile 
tubes had been preempted by the 
animal pens. 

We squatted and waited. 

There came a time when the 
noise of combat slacked off and 
seemed more distant. I cut out 
the ruptured eardrums of our 
sound-ranging gear and tried to 
take a fix. There was still fighting, 
but it was drifting south of us and 
east. 

Nina said over my shoulder, 
watching the indicator needles: 
Theyre running for it. The Cao- 
dais are chasing them. 

It seemed that way, but what- 
ever Monmouth was up to, we 
had still only one choice  to wait. 
If we were spotted by any Cao- 
dai, even a corvette, we were 
done; but if we stayed dead and 
silent on the ocean floor, we had a 
prayer of a hope. We would be 
spotted, no doubt about it, but 
spotted as a hulk of metal, noth- 
ing more. 

And the floor of the Indian 
Ocean just about there was rich 
in metal hulks. 

114 



TTARD AS it was on us, it was 
even harder on the animals. 
Josie was anxiously asking what 
was goiqg on, the puppies were al- 
ternately demanding food and 
whining for their box, the seals 
in their pens were barking wor- 
riedly. The process of learning 
had gone both ways. While we 
were picking up Dog and Seal, 
they were picking up Human In- 
tonations. They could tell we 
were upset and there is nothing 
in the world more likely to upset 
an animal that that knowledge. 

Quiet, quiet, pleaded Sem- 
yon in English and Dog and Seal. 
You will drive me insane, you 
beasts. He pushed the puppies to 
the floor and called Josie to at- 
tend to them. Dog, he said, but 
not to the animals; he was glow- 
ering at Winnington, silent against 
the hull of the whaleboat. 

Leave him alone, I said. 
Semyon switched his glower to 
me. Leave him alone, it is? But 
did he leave us alone? He sent us 
to the bottom, Logan! Filthy 
patchifist, he fired the guns! 
Winnington asked morosely: 
From here? 

Hah, said Semyon. No, not 
you, but your brother patchifist, 
whoever he was. For peace you 
did it? Pig, how would it be for 
peace to make war? 

For ultimate peace! Winning- 
ton flared. You think we like kill- 
ing people, we peacemen? Youre 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



f 



an idiot if you think that peace 
means sitting quiet and taking 
punishment. He was flushed and 
excited, taking a queer pleasure 
in the fact that we were all of us 
near death. That is not pacifism, 
thats stupidity! We must tight 
for peace, we must destroy the en- 
emy. Kill everybody who might 
kill us  then, only then, well 
have peace! 

We let him rant himself out 
while, very cautiously, we rocked 
the whaleboat free of the mud 
and crept quietly to the thermo- 
plane. We were no longer getting 
sounds of battle in the audic ap- 
paratus. Either the battle was 
over or out of range  or it was 
perhaps fairly close, but masked 
by the interface between the bot- 
tom water and the warmer waters 
above. 

The thermographs showed us 
when we breached the interface. 
I cut the drive, cut the ventilator 
switches, cut every motor that 
could give out a sound, and we 
listened as hard as we could. The 
little torp began instantly to set- 
tle, but we had plenty of water 
under us and the important thing 
was to be all ears, no sound, until 
we found out what was going on 
around us. 

A S THE whaleboat lost forward 
speed the diving vanes 
ceased to bear us up and we slid 
downward, closer to the thermo- 



plane we had just crossed. The 
autopilot began frantically manu- 
facturing course corrections. It 
flipped the diving vanes and the 
rudders like a panicked barnyard 
hen, and when that produced no 
effect, it began to beep complain- 
ingly. I snapped its cut-off switch 
and it was silent again, and we 
listened. 

Nothing. 

Nina said: Do you think we 
ought to try the sonars? 

I shook my head and started 
the motors as we sank under the 
thermoplane again. No sense 
looking for trouble. If somebodys 
playing possum close by, theyll 
hear us on their audic, all right 
 but if we ping them, they 
wont even have to be close by. 
I locked in the autopilot. Now 
what? I asked. 

We had a long debate over 
what to do next. But it could only 
be decided one way. There was 
a Caodai installation on Mada- 
gascar, little more than three hun- 
dred miles away. Our mission was 
to survey it; if necessary, to at- 
tempt to destroy it. We would 
carry out our mission. 

Surprisingly, even Winnington 
agreed. Very patriotic, he 
sneered. But Ill go along. The 
sooner we wipe out those rats, the 
sooner the Peace Party can rule 
America. 

Very patriotic, Semyon 
agreed moodily. Also quite wise. 



SLAVE SHIP 



115 



I think. Because  am I wrong, 
Logan?  we do not really have 
a choice; we are ten thousand 
miles from home. And this little 
boat they give us, its range is not 
more than a thousand. 

Madagascar was only three 
hundred miles away  but the 
island was a thousand miles long. 
It was touch-and-go whether we 
would make it. 

Semyon swore gloomily, coax- 
ing the power reserves along. We 
crept on the bottom, taking our 
position from sonar soundings and 
one daring midnight surfacing for 
a star fix. We made it 

We hovered in a muddy little 



estuary while Semyon talked 
lengthily to one of the seals. Then 
we bribed the seal into the aft 
ejection tube. It wasnt necessary 
to blast him out with compressed 
air; he could swim free. He pilot- 
fished us up the little river as far 
as we dared go in the whaleboat, 
coming back to report and going 
forth to scout again. It was tedi- 
ous but reasonably safe. 

SENT Semyon and Josie 
out to scout; it was night 
and we were in a little cove, hid- 
den by tangled growth. They 
were gone forever, and came back 
covered with mud. 



116 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 







Is a terrible place, Logan, 
Semyon groaned. I thought we 
would be captured many times. 
But  it is there. 

Target Gamma? 

One presumes so. He sighed. 
There is a small town on this 
bank of the river. Perhaps two 
miles past it is a ring of labor 
camps. And in the center of the 
ring, something which is guarded. 
I did not myself see it, you under- 
stand, but Josie says it smells 
secret. 

It was nearly dawn. Semyon 
was worn out, but Josie was as 
frisky as a puppy. She tended 
her brood while we were talking 



and demanded to be included in 
the party when we were through. 

We left Semyon to watch over 
Winnington and the other ani- 
mals. Nina, Josie and I made up 
the party that proposed to knock 
out the Caodais secret-weapon 
base. 

A girl, a dog and me. Struggling 
into her Madagascan coolie out- 
fit  slacks, sweater, floppy hat 
 Nina saw my expression and 
laughed. Cheer up, Moeller, she 
said. Theres only about five mil- 
lion Caodais on the island. Not 
bad odds. 

I found myself grinning back 
at her. It was a queer thing  I 
couldnt help thinking about it, 
even with the approaching raid 
on my mind. Nina was an easy 
girl to get along with. It had been 
a long time since I had paid much 
attention to other girls. Why was 
it that now, with Elsie, compara- 
tively speaking, almost within 
reach, I was suddenly noticing 
how sweet and  and charming, 
I had to confess it, another girl 
was? 

It wasnt a line of speculation 
I really wanted to follow to its 
end. I was glad when we slipped 
out of the upper hatch and 
climbed ashore to get started. 

ii \ LTE-LA, ALTE-LA," grum- 
bled the man in the yellow 
robe. Vous etes bien pressee? 

Idiot, Nina muttered to me 



SLAVE SHIP 



117 




in English. I told you to take it 
easy. She smiled appealingly at 
the priest and spoke to him in 
rapid-fire French. I could make 
out only part of it: We were 
freshly arrived from Tananarive 
and looking for work; could he 
direct us to a rooming house? 

The Caodai shook his head. 
Without much interest, he 
yawned and stretched and asked 
to see our passports. That pre- 
sented a problem, because Nina 
didnt have one. Semyon and I 
had been issued the best set of 
forged credentials Naval Intelli- 
gence could cook up, but no one 
had planned for Nina to be along. 
However, Ninas French could get 
by and mine couldnt, so we were 
in trouble either way; we had de- 
cided to pass as man and wife 
and hope that one passport would 
do for both. 

Nina kept up a clamor of ques- 
tions and comments while the 
priest was looking over the yel- 
low card that identified me as an 
agricultural worker of French ori- 
gin. There were plenty of them 
on Madagascar, hangovers from 
the colonial days and the over- 
throw that followed. The priest 
had evidently been up all night 
and real'.y just wanted to collect 
a toll for crossing the footbridge. 

He tossed the document back 
at me and growled: Foutez le 
camp, touse les deux. We paid 
him and moved along. 

118 



As soon as we were across the 
bridge into the town itself, Nina 
turned on me. Moeller, she 
snapped, if you cant relax, well 
never get through. Walk slowly! 
Youve supposedly been walking 
a long way and youre tired. Hop 
like a grasshopper and youll at- 
tract attention. 

T transferred the cord tied to 
Josies collar to my other 
hand. Sure, I said. What do we 
do, amble casually right through 
the town? 

What else? It was early 
morning, but already the streets 
were crowded. Most of the people 
moving about the narrow streets 
were Arab-African mixtures of 
one hue or another, but there was 
an admixture of Orientals and a 
handful of Europeans. 

More than half of the Orientals 
wore the yellow robes, blouse or 
shorts of the Caodais. But they 
were not alone; several priests we 
passed were obviously nearly 
pure African. Caodaism, like the 
Mohammedans before them, 
practiced a rigid sort of tolerance; 
there was no distinction in skin 
color or creed for them  if the 
man whose skin was in question 
was willing to embrace the 
Caodai revelations and, if called 
up, join the Caodai armed forces. 

And hundreds of millions 
throughout the Asian and African 
world had been more than willing. 

GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



f The streets were not only nar- 
*^row; they wound like wormholes 
in an apple. I had to consult 
- Josies superior sense of direction 
 bending and talking to her 
under pretense of loosening her 
collar  to keep us heading 
straight through the town. She 
was almost the only leashed dog 
in sight and therefore attracted 
a little more attention than I 
liked; the Madagascan custom 
appeared to be to let dogs roam 
the streets, as unhampered and as 
privileged as a Benares bull. 

Everyone, it appeared, spoke 
French. I remembered that the 
Caodais themselves had come 
from a section of the Indonesian 
peninsula once under French rule, 
and of course Madagascar had 
been French for nearly a century. 

' All the same, it seemed odd to 
hear brown, black, tan and yellow 
faces conversing in the language 
I associated with bombed-out 
cities and finishing schools. 

44QOFTLY, SAID Nina. Keep 
your eyes on your lunch. 
We were sitting beside the road 
as a company of Caodai infantry 
swung past. There was a sort of 
clearing in the vegetation, on the 
outskirts of the little town we had 
crossed; there were Oriental ven- 
dors of foods and we were not the 
only ones who had paused there 
for a bite to eat. The Caodai sol- 
diers paid no attention to any of 



us, being disciplined, eyes-front 
troops. 

They passed. Nina left me for 
a moment with the dog and 
talked briefly to one of the ven- 
dors. She came back with a hand- 
ful of dried dates and two Coca- 
Colas and said: 

Security troops, I think. There 
are slave labor camps ahead. 
Does Josie recognize this road? 

I spoke to the dog; she growled 
back dubiously. It smelled alto- 
gether different, I translated to 
for Nina, but she thinks its the 
same place. It has something to 
do with daytime smells and night- 
time smells. 

Nina nodded. It checks. Labor 
camps beyond the bend in the 
road, something big on the other 
side of them. According to the 
Coke man, theres nothing to stop 
us going right along the road  
all the Caodai installations are off 
to one side, on the bank of the 
river. 

It was high noon, or nearly, and 
most of the other pedestrians 
were disappearing down side 
roads and into shops and cafes. 
Nina and I conferred briefly and 
followed their example. We 
struck out boldly down one of the 
little dirt paths toward the river, 
looking for a place to use as a 
base of operations. No one 
stopped us; no one paid any at- 
tention. I was expecting Caodai 
infantrymen to pounce out at us 



SLAVE SHIP 



119 



from behind every tree. 

I must have shown it, because 
Nina snapped: I told you, Logan, 
relax. Nobodys going to bother 
us. 

She was right. After all, we 
were not a platoon of commando- 
ing Marines, anti-flash painted, 
tommygun-carrying, camouflage- 
helmeted. We were only a man 
and a woman and a dog; if I had 
seen a party like ours anywhere 
in the United States, I would 
scarcely have noticed it. 

Except  

Come to think of it, I would 
have noticed such a party. I said 
curiously to Nina: See anything 
unusual about these people? Ci- 
vilians! Outside of the Caodai 
priests and the troops that 
marched by in the road  how 
many have you seen in uniform? 
She nodded thoughtfully. A 
pMuliar way to fight a war, I 
guess. Youd think theyd be as 
deep in this thing as we are, 
wouldnt you? Now look, she 
said, dismissing it, how about hol- 
ing up here and sending Josie in 
for a look? 

TT WAS a good enough place  
on the shore of the river, 
where we might appear to be rest- 
ing and enjo5ung the view if any- 
one should come along. I talked 
to Josie long enough to make 
sure she imderstood. 

Josie was a patient dog, but she 



had very little comprehension of 
just what we humans were about, 
there on the banks of the Mada- 
gascan creek. She wasnt a stray 
mutt and she didnt want to act 
like one; she complained that she 
had been told many times that it 
was impolite and inexcusable to 
eat out of garbage piles or cans  
and yet that was what we were 
asking her to do now, to justify 
her wanderings. She was a well- 
brought-up dog who had been 
taught to stay close to her home 
and master and  

I finally snarled loud enough to 
convince her; she rolled over on 
her back and I had to pat her 
stomach to let her know we were 
still friends. With the canine 
equivalent of a shrug, she started 
out. 

Hours passed and she didnt 
come back. 

Dogs have no sense of time, 
I explained to Nina, possibly for 
the hundredth time. 

She said reluctantly: I know. 
Im sorry if Im pestering you. 
But Im getting worried. 

We had something to worry 
about, I agreed  but I didnt 
agree out loud. I was the junior 
member of our expedition, and 
though we had never articulated 
a command relationship, I was 
perfectly willing to treat Ninas 
suggestions as orders. Spying 
was her line of work, not mine. 

But it was dark and we were 



120 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



in enemy territory and a good bet 
to be shot out of hand in case 
someone asked us questions. Our 
scout was overdue reporting back 
and Nina was getting worried. 
And without any fuss, our relative 
positions changed. We were no 
longer commander and jaygee; 
we were worried woman and  
however falsely  reassuring man. 
I liked it much better that way. 

Stay here. Ill take a look 
around, said the man to the 
woman. 

The devil you will, said the 
commander to the jaygee. Use 
your fat head for something, 
Logan. How do you expect to find 
the dog  whistle all the way 
from here to the Caodai installa- 
tion? 

I said reasonably: Of course 
not. I just want to take a look 
around   

No. 

So that was that  for the 
time being. 

B ut time passed and Josie 
stayed away; and what it 
came down to in the long run was 
the choice of which of us should 
go looking. And I won, if you can 
call it that. 

Madagascar was an unfriendly 
place, after dark of a night. I 
could hear vehicles on the paved 
road, but I stayed off it. I could 
hear voices, now and again, 
around the houses that fronted on 



the river, but I gave them a wide 
berth. I felt uncomfortably like 
a fawn somehow forced to slink 
through Central Park from end 
to end, avoiding the worrisome 
human smell all about. Only I 
was more purposeful than a fawn, 
of course; closer perhaps to a 
beast of prey  a fox, say, trying 
to raid a henhouse. 

And unaware (or all too fright- 
eningly aware) that the henhouse 
was guarded by mastiffs. 

I wasnt so much looking for 
the dog as trying to accomplish 
the dogs job. If Josie turned up 
where Nina waited in the clear- 
ing, good; Nina would hold her 
there until I returned. But if not, 
we couldnt stay there forever. It 
would then be my spied-out infor- 
mation we would go back to the 
whaleboat with, not Josies. All I 
wanted was one clear look at the 
secret installation up ahead. 
Much more than that I couldnt 
hope for, but from whatever I 
could find out then, we could 
plan. 

There were lights ahead. I was 
on the brink of the woods, facing 
a plowed-up open strip that sur- 
rounded a lighted, barbed-wire- 
enclosed compound  the prison 
camps, I supposed. There were 
Caodai guards emplaced about 
the fence, but not so close to me 
that I had to worry about them. 
Their attention would certainly 
be inward, toward the prisoners. 



SLAVE SHIP 



121 



But beyond the barbed wire, per- 
haps a quarter of a mile, there 
were two bright-lit yellow brick 
towers. 

So far, so good. I skirted the 
edge of the plowed ground and 
headed for the lighted towers. 

I was pretty lucky. I must have 
gone a hundred yards before they 
caught me. 

XVI 

WTl^STERN SWINE! hissed 

 the Caodai. Stay and 
brood on your crimes. Western 
swine! 

It didnt seem fair for him to 
call me that; he was as white as 
I. Fair-haired and chunky, he 
might have been of Dutch ances- 
try, but the Caodais didnt care 
about that. 

He threw me into a cell and 
marched his detail away. I was 
in a yellow-walled room under- 
neath the twin-towered building 
I had seen alight. 

Logan, old boy, I told myself, 
youve had it. 

Consider this fact: 

I was out of uniform in Caodai 
territory  that made me a spy. 
It was well known what the Cao- 
dai did to spies. 

There was only one bright 
spot: 

Nina and Semyon were still 
free. 

They knew I had been cap- 
122 



tured, so they would be careful. 
Would being careful be enough, 
though? I didnt know, but, on 
thinking it over, I decided it 
wouldnt, because there simply 
was no precaution they could 
take that would counterbalance 
their having to get inside the 
temple I was in. 

I couldnt forget what the 
briefing officer had told us all, 
back on Monmouth: This expedi- 
tion had to work, because the 
Caodais could not continue to be 
in possession of the secret of the 
Glotch. 

Western swine! 

My Dutch friend was at the 
door. He wasnt alone. A very 
dark Caodai, wearing a shoulder 
patch that looked like a rook in 
chess, brought in a case full of 
shiny things. Half a dozen other 
Caodais followed. Two of them 
grabbed me. 

The dark one took a hypoder- 
mic needle out of the case. 

Wait a minute! I said sharply. 
You cant do this to me! I claim 
the protection of international 
law. You can execute me, but  
ow! He was mighty clumsy with 
that needle. 

It tingled for a second and then 
my whole upper arm and shoul- 
der began to feel cold. Well, I 
knew what was coming next. 
Subtle Oriental poisons, for a 
start. Then brainwashing. Tor- 
ture. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



I said to myself: Good-by, 

Elsie. I was beginning to feel cold 
all over; the fair-skinned Caodai 
was standing over me, but he 
seemed far away. 

He took out a pad of paper. 
Your name? he demanded. 
Name, rank and serial number. 
That was all, I reminded myself. 

I gave them to him as briskly and 
finally as I could: Moeller, 
Logan, lieutenant junior grade, 
X-SaT-32880515. 

How did you get here? 

I stiffened; it was beginning. 
But he would never find out 
about Monmouth and the whale- 
boat from me. I refuse to an- 
swer, I said distinctly. 

I T TOOK an effort. The yellow 
walls were swirling around me 
now. I no longer felt cold; I 
hardly felt anything at all. I could 
barely hear the Dutch Caodai 
saying: Where are your com- 
panions? 

Which one? Semyon was in 
the whaleboat, I supposed, but 
Nina  

I got a grip on myself. No 
answer, I said. 

I stared at him Wearily, won- 
dering what made a man like him 
turn renegade. Of course, when 
the Caodais overran the former 
Dutch colonies in the Indies, they 
had picked up everyone who 
would join them. In that respect, 
the Caodais were a perfect de- 



mocracy. But still and all, a white 
renegade in Caodai uniform was 
hard to take. 

Atheistic Western swine! 
hissed the Caodai. Dont dare 
call me a renegade! 

Fantastic, I thought to myself 
drowsily. Ifs almost as if I were 
speaking my thoughts aloud. 

I woke up with a jump. I had 
a sour, tinny taste in my mouth 
and an unbelievable headache. 

Nina Willette was shaking me. 
You cracked! Moeller, listen to 
me. 

I blinked blearily at her. She 
said, with pity and reproach: 
They worked you over, didnt 
they, Logan? But you shouldn t 
have cracked. 

Hey, I protested, hold it! I 
sat up and tried to set her 
straight. I gave them my name 
and rank and serial number. 
Thats all. I didnt crack! 

No? She looked at me and 
the pity was subtracted from her 
gaze, leaving only the reproach. 
Then how did they know where 
I was? 

Be reasonable, Nina. They 
must have   

How did they know my 
name? 

Good God! I whispered. 
That needle. They must have 
shot me full of scopolamine. 

Exactly, atheistic Western 
swine, said the blond Caodai, 
opening the door. Exactly. 



SLAVE SHIP 



123 



They were not gentle with us, 
but I hardly noticed. Truth 
serum! The psychic censors 
numbed, the questions answered 
 I must have spilled my guts 
for fair. 

It was no comfort to reassure 
myself that it was not my fault, 
because it was a lie. It was my 
fault  my fault for allowing 
myself to be captured, my fault 
for being there in the first place. 

We were led out of the cell, 
Nina Willette and I, and up into 
the main workings of the twin- 
towered temple. Target Gamma! 

If only we had some way of 
getting back to America with 
what we were seeing now! 

A ND YET, coming out of my 
fog of self-reproach, looking 
about me against the faint, almost 
vanished chance that I might 
some day be able to get back and 
report, what would I have to say? 

I could say: We went through 
a long yellow corridor full of Cao- 
dais. 

I could say: They looked at 
us as though we were lepers. 

But I couldnt say that I had 
learned the secret of the weapon 
called the Glotch, because there 
was no sign of anything like that 
anywhere around. 

An arsenal? I had thought we 
might be headed for something 
like that, but this didnt look like 
an arsenal. It looked more like a 

124 



hospital, or perhaps a medical 
laboratory, than anjrthing else I 
had ever encountered, and that 
wasnt really a matter of looks 
but of smell, the faint under-layer 
of ether and iodoform you find in 
medical places. There were no 
whirring machines or hidden in- 
dustrial plants, only the whisper- 
ing air and medicinal odor and 
white-and-pastel look, in the little 
rooms we caught glimpses of. 

And for this we had sacrificed 
Monmouth. 

We reached a high-ceiling room 
where an old Caodai in a scarlet 
cloak stood frozen beside a bright 
globe. 

Votre saint ete, said the 
blond-haired Caodai, les ameri- 
cains. 

Nina stiffened beside me. The 
pope, she whispered, unbeliev- 
ing. 

It took me a moment to under- 
stand what she meant. Not the 
pontiff of Rome, no, but the su- 
preme chief of the Caodais, who 
wore the same title. The old Cao- 
dai by the globe of the world was 
Nguyen Yat Hugo himself! 

Remember what I had seen of 
old Nguyen: latrine posters, 
showing him luring helpless U.N. 
soldiery into haunts of bawdy 
vice, his yellow face wicked and 
fierce, his long fingers clawed like 
a killer cats. 

But he was only a man. 

If he was evil, it did not show 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




SLAVE SHIP 



125 



in his face. He stood gravely 
watching us as we approached. 
He was tall for an Indo-Chinese, 
old but not senile, his robes curi- 
ous but not ridiculous. I remem- 
bered the Caodais in their stock- 
ade north of Project Mako and 
their fantastic paper figurines of 
this man. It was hard not to think 
of him as a figure of fun (Mardi 
Gras masks and Jacks-in-the- 
box), but in his presence it wasnt 
hard at all. 

You slime! 

Not evil but anger. He spoke to 
us and he was raging. Nina, be- 
side me, made a little choking 
sound. 

He lashed into us verbally, 
cut us to ribbons. We were 
slime, wretches, unfit to live. We 
stood there and listened. What 
else could we do? 

TTE FINALLY rounded a pe- 
riod and stopped, his face 
as emotionless as before. He said 
something short and foreign to 
one of the Caodai priests  a 
middle-aged woman who looked 
like my mothers laundress  
and we all waited while the priest 
left and then returned. 

She brought another woman 
with her, a slight brown-haired 
womani in faded khaki. I stared 
at her curiously as she blinked in 
the light. It crossed my mind that 
she was no Caodai. She had the 
look of an American, though her 



dress might have been Caodai as 
much as anything else. She looked 
out of place here. I watched her, 
waiting for something to happen 
that would explain why she was 
here. 

By and by, I noticed that the 
Caodais were very intently watch- 
ing me. 

And then I realized who the 
girl was. 

Strange that I should see my 
long-lost wife and not at once rec- 
ognize her? 

I suppose so, but I wasnt the 
only one that had to do a double- 
take. Elsie herself didnt quiver a 
muscle until I suddenly yelled 
her name. 

There was a dizzy, slippery, 
sliding moment when everything 
around me crashed into new ar- 
rangements and meanings and I 
stood still, like an idiot, saying 
her name and staring. And then 
I was running toward her and she 
toward me. 

We shook hands. 

It was more that than a lovers 
hug  we stopped inches apart 
and I reached out my hands 
toward hers. 

Perhaps the strain would have 
passed and we would have been 
in each others arms, but the Gab- 
dai chief stopped us. 

Your wife, he said in a clear, 
savage voice. Enjoy her for this 
moment, my lieutenant. She may 
not live to the next. 



126 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



I had dropped Elsies hands, 
spun around and was halfway to 
him, in a single reflex, before the 
Caodai officers leaped between 
me and Nguyen, and their 
weapons were in their hands. 

I said: What the devil are you 
up to? 

Up to? he repeated bitterly. 
No, Lieutenant, I want to know 
what you are up to. Perhaps we 
could have pieced out our infor- 
mation from your subconscious, 
where we found your wifes name 
and the story of your interesting 
voyage here. But it would have 
taken time, and I do not have 
time. 

I TOOK A deep breath and the 
officers slowly bolstered their 
guns. Nina was on one side of me 
and Elsie on the other. 

I said: What do yoii want? 
Information! Truthful an- 
swers, Lieutenant  for which I 
will pay  with your life and 
your wifes. 

I glanced at Elsie and Nina. 
Both of them were watching me, 
waiting for me to do something, 
waiting for my brilliant solution 
to an intolerable predicament. 
But there wasnt any solution in 
me. 

I looked around at the Caodai 
officers, at the implacable face of 
Nguyen Yat Hugo. The thing was 
bitterly ironic: The Caodai was 
demanding information from me. 



information that could hardly be 
of any real importance to the 
Caodai cause (for what did I have 
to say, past the minutiae of our 
voyage?), but which I knew I 
would die to keep from him. 

If our positions had changed  
if it were I who had the secret 
of what they called the Glotch 
and he who had to learn it to live 

 then it might have made sense, 
both his insistence to learn and 
my willingness to die, and have 
Nina and Elsie die, rather than 
tell. 

It didnt make sense. It was an 
outrageous perversion of human 
values for the three of us to suffer 
for the sake of concealing so little. 

But that, as they say, was the 
way the little old ball bounced. I 
cleared my throat once and said 
to Nguyen Yat Hugo: 

Go to hell! 

Well, the heavens didnt fall on 
us just then, though I had thought 
they might. But I underestimated 
Nguyen. 

All that happened was that he 
gave quick orders and the three 
of us were marched out  sepa- 
rately. And there I was in the 
yellow-walled room again. 

I knew what it was, of course 

 the softening up that makes 
the ultimate tearing apart so 
much easier. Leave the Ameri- 
cans alone, Nguyen had said to 
his officers; put them away and 
let them worry for a while; let 



SLAVE SHIP 



127 



them scare themselves to death 
by brooding on whats going to 
happen to them. 

But I didnt think it was going 
to work. 

I sat there, staring at the yel- 
low walls and wondering which 
of the footsteps in the corridor 
outside was going to be my tor- 
turers, and I coded up all the 
factors and played them through 
the computer inside my skull. 

Too bad that I had spilled 
Elsies name and location in my 
drugged state so that Nguyen 
could have her flown here to tor- 
ture me with. Too bad that Nina 
had been caught the same way. 
Too bad that no one could get 
word of what had happened to us 
to Semyon, back in the whale- 
boat. 

Too bad. All of it too bad. 

But those losses were already 
raked in and there was no point 
in wishing the little steel ball had 
dropped in a different slot. 

T WOULD have been better, 
I concluded, if I were in this 
all by myself, but since I wasnt, 
I would have to do the best I 
could with the circumstances I 
had to work with. Nguyen would 
roast in his Caodai hell before I 
would tell him a single syllable of 
what he wanted to know. Not be- 
cause it mattered what I told him 
(for I knew nothing, of course), 
nor because I was a hero (for I 



knew from the trembling of my 
arms and legs I was not), but 
because that was the way the 
game was played. 

And I wasnt going to get out 
alive, anyhow. 

That was the important thing 
to remember: I was going to die. 
No matter what Nguyen said, 1 
was a spy, trapped in a spys role, 
and the best I could hope for was 
a quick firing squad. 

Once I had thought of all of the 
possibilities, the computer that 
was my brain quickly rapped out 
my solution; it wasnt hard to see. 
Back at M.I.T., when I had 
learned computer operation and 
the mathematics that went with 
it, we had had a course in what 
they call Theory of Games. It 
hadnt kept me from dropping 
all of my loose change in each of 
the weekly poker nights, but it 
probably prolonged the process. 

Roughly, it came to this: When 
things go well, play to win as 
much as you can; when things go 
poorly, play to lose as little. 

This was no spot for maximiz- 
ing gains. There was no prospect 
of any gain worth having. It was 
a spot for minimizing losses. I 
couldnt hope to get us all freely 
and successfully away. But I 
could hope that, perhaps, I would 
be the only one to die. If I did, 
Nina would have to stand by her- 
self  but was she any better off 
with me alive? And Elsie, on the 



128 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



other hand, was nothing to 
Nguyen. She had no information; 
she had not been trapped in es- 
pionage. He might conceivably 
kill her out of pique  but not 
probably. 

So the thing for me to do was 
to make the guards kill me right 
away. 

On the principle of minimiza- 
tion of losses, I couldnt even try 
to grab a gun and shoot Nguyen. 
That was too risky  not to me, 
but to Elsie and Nina in case I 
was successful. What I had to 
have was a nice, quiet, futile at- 
tack on a humble, trigger-happy 
guard. End of Lieutenant Logan 
Moeller. As minimal a loss as 
anyone could imagine. 

I made my plans and then I 
waited. 

T hey came for me  I dont 

know after how long a time. 

It was important that I do 
nothing premature. I didnt make 
the mistake of attacking them as 
soon as they poked their noses in 
the door  they might have just 
clobbered me with their fists and 
tied me to make sure I didnt try 
it again. I went along with them. 

Though I know the Dutch Cao- 
dai addressed me in English, I 
paid no attention to their actions 
or manner. Down the corridor, 
into the elevator, out into the 
great hall. At the entrance to the 
hall, I decided, I would grab for 



a gun, point it at the handiest 
figure in a yellow robe and wait 
for the bullets. 

We got to the entrance and the 
moment the door opened, I made 
my move. I got the gun  sur- 
prisingly, with no difficulty. I had 
thought that would be the hard 
part, but the guards grip was in- 
credibly lax. I had it and I leaped 
through the door and drew a bead 
on the female priest, the closest 
to me, standing morosely by the 
door. I could feel my shoulder- 
blades drawing close to each 
other, waiting for the bullets to 
strike. 

Only  

No bullets. 

I gaped around. There were the 
Caodai officers and there was 
Nguyen. And there, smoking a 
cigarette, swinging a gun in his 
free hand... 

Splendidly done, Logan! said 
Semyon earnestly, throwing away 
the cigarette. A brilliant maneu- 
ver. I should have known I would 
not be necessary. Is too bad you 
cannot capture these Orientals 
and deliver them to justice, is it 
not? But, you see, I have done so 
already. 

XVIII 

I T TOOK a while for it to sink 
in and I stood gaping in the 
meantime. 

Semyon shrugged modestly. A 



SLAVE SHIP 



129 



heroic feat, you say? I hadnt 
said anything of the sort. Oh, 
perhaps. But the credit should 
not merely be my own, Logan. 
Equally brave were the crew. We 
slipped up this filthy small river, 
every man at his post, searching 
out the Oriental target   

I goggled. What   

The crew, he said emphati- 
cally, is brave also. Every man 
of them. No, no, Logan, I under- 
stand that you think of me as 
your rescuer, but without the six 
men in our crew out there in the 
river, manning the guns that will 
blow the roof off this very yellow 
brick building, what would my 
small gun accomplish? 

I caught on. I was surprised 
that Nguyen and his court didnt 
catch on, too, he made it so easy. 
But Semyon hurried on: And we 
must not keep them waiting, 
Logan. If I do not appear outside 
within   he consulted his watch 
 eleven minutes, that is the 
end of all of us. Come, old man. 
He jerked his pistol at Nguyen. 
Let us go to surrender. 

Nguyen corrected coldly. I 
agreed to talk. I do not sur- 
render. 

As you wish it, old man. But 
come outside now, if you please. 
Perhaps my crews watches are 
not accurate. 

Well, we all went  Semyon 
and the pope and Nina and Elsie, 
fresh from their own cells and as 

130 



astonished as I, and all. And then 
I was even more astonished, be- 
cause there at the foot of the 
grass that went down to the little 
river rocked the whaleboat, look- 
ing tiny and ridiculous in the 
African sun; and as we came out, 
the muzzles of the deck guns, 
capable of launching high explo- 
sive shells that would blow us all 
to free ions in the air, swiveled 
to cover us. 

I looked at them incredulously. 
Who were the gunners? And then 
I thought I understood. I whis- 
pered to Semyon: Winnington? 
Tied up, he whispered back. 
Hush. Out loud, he said: 
What is it to be, old man? Do we 
all die here and now? Or do we 
discover a solution that permits 
us all to go on living? 

Nguyen, staring sourly at the 
little whaleboat, said: There is 
none. You cannot go free. But it 
was clever of you. Lieutenant, to 
have lied under our drug. 

I said helpfully: Oh, I wasnt. 
Enough! cried Semyon. One 
thing at a time, if you please. 
He glared at me and said to the 
Caodai: These are our terms. 
First, you give us safe-conduct out 
of the belligerent zone. Second, 
you come with us as a hostage. 
Third, you attempt no reprisals. 
Fourth   

Three will do, said the Cao- 
dai. No. 

Semyon blinked at him. No? 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



N guyen again was the im- 
placable, ageless figure I had 
first seen. He contemptuously ig- 
nored Semyons gun, ignored the 
deck guns of the w^haleboat, 
stepped close to Semyon and 
looked him in the eye. He said: 
You shall not escape. You would 
not get so far as the mouth of the 
I river. 

 Semyon retorted: Well blow 
you to bits. 

Do. 

Semyon looked at me. 
Logan? he inquired weakly. 

I cleared my throat. Will you 
give us a safe-conduct, at least? 
No. 

Will you   

Nothing, my lieutenant. If the 
Great Palace wishes my death at 
this time, I shall die; that is as 
the Great Palace wishes it. 

I stared at him thoughtfully. 
He stared right back, not giving 
, an inch. It wasnt bluff. Here was 
the pope of all the Caodais, the 
supreme ruler of half the Earth, 
the most deadly fighting man the 
i world had ever made. And here 
were we, a handful of unimpor- 
tant humans and a couple of dogs 
and seals, and he was willing to 
die rather than even give us his 
promise  which he could have 
broken without a moments pang 
 to let us go free. 

I shook my head silently. He 
never would have passed Game 
Theory at M.I.T., I thought, an- 



noyed. Everything was with him; 
this was a time for him to be 
maximizing his gains, stretching 
out to conquer the world as it 
reeled under the Glotch. 

I swallowed and stared harder. 
Maybe, the thought came from 
nowhere, maybe he might have 
passed the course, after all. 
Maybe it was not his technique 
that was wrong, but my estimate 
of the situation. 

I contemplated the thought in- 
credulously. Could it be, I asked 
myself, that things werent going 
as well as they seemed for old 
Nguyen? It was ridiculous. And 
yet, as he stood there, he was no 
voracious conqueror; he was a 
sober, fierce old man, hopeless of 
moving forward, but inflexibly 
unwilling to retreat. 

It didnt make sense. 

I T WAS an impasse and we 
might have been there yet  
if Semyon had ever been a Boy 
Scout. I dont know what they 
taught them at the Suvorov Acad- 
emy, but I guarantee knot-tying 
was not in the curriculum, be- 
cause while we were staring at 
each other, there was an inter- 
ruption. 

And the name of the interrup- 
tion was Winnington. 

It was Nina who saw him. 
Logan! she gasped. Were in 
trouble! The topside hatch of the 
whaleboat was open and Win- 



SLAVE SHIP 



131 



ningtons surly face was sticking 
out 

We were all armed, of course, 
with guns wed taken from the 
resentful Caodais and perhaps, if 
wed been quicker, we could have 
potted Winnington before he got 
out of the hatch. But he had the 
jump on us. He was manning the 
deck guns from the breech posi- 
tion and it was too late; we 
couldnt shoot. If we had looked 
as through we were going to 
shoot, it would have been the last 
look on the faces of any of us. He 
cut out the switches to the remote 
fire-control stations below and 
stared at us, evidently deciding 
what to do. 

A small brown pointed nose 
poked out of the hatch behind 
him. Josie. She looked worried, 
even at that distance, and I knew 
why. Semyon had left her to run 
the remotes on the deck guns, as 
she had so painstakingly learned 
back in the monitor at Project 
Mako, but his instructions had 
not included what to do in the 
event that a human captive got 
free. Naturally Josie was per- 
plexed. 

But not so perplexed and wor- 
ried as I, because I knew what 
Winnington was likely to do. 
Peace? Hed do whatever came 
to hand for that ideal; hed win 
peace even if he had to blow up 
the world to get it. 

He bent to the loud-hailer and 



his amplified bellow nearly 
bowled us over. Get out of the 
way! 

Semyon shouted furiously; 
Turn that thing off! Get away 
from those guns, Winnington, I 
command you! 

Hah! roared Winnington, but 
he did turn the loud-hailer off. I 
said get out of the way! I see who 
youve got there. Either you move 
or you go with him! 

And he put his thumbs on the 
gun-trips. 

Semyon cried: Wait! Wait, 
Winnington! Let us not be hasty! 
There is much to lose. But he 
seemed to have panicked; he was 
snapping his fingers erratically, 
babbling words that made little 
sense. 

Winnington shouted angrily: 
No stalling, Timayazev. Ill give 
you ten seconds to stand aside. 
Ten seconds, you hear me? 
Please, begged Semyon, snap- 
ping his fingers frantically; I 
stared at him incredulously, won- 
dering how far he had been 
pushed to dissolve so completely 
in terror. Please, Winnington, I 
beg of you, do not fire! 

A ND THEN I wasnt staring at 
Semyon at all, but at the 
deck of the whaleboat. Hesitantly, 
by fits and starts, looking bewil- 
deredly at Semyon, Josie moved 
up behind Winnington. It was 
absolutely impossible, I told my- 



132 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



self, but she seemed to be follow- 
ing orders. But what orders? I 
glanced at Semyon. He was 
scarcely looking at the dog, only 
pleading with the pacifist and 
snapping his  

Snapping bis fingers. 

I remembered the cricket and 
the little one-word language. 
And there, if you like, is a meas- 
ure of comparative intelligence, 
for it was clear that Josie had 
remembered it before me. She 
closed her eyes and took a nip 
out of Winnington. 

Reflexes are reflexes. Josie, 
yowling, was kicked yards away 
and into the water by Winning- 
tons foot, but by the time he got 
his eyes around front again, it 
was a little too late. Semyon had 
been waiting; his gun was up. He 
fired and Winnington dropped. 

And now, old man, Semyon 
said to the pope, perfectly calm, 
Sve resume our little talk, cor- 
rect? I have saved your life from 
that patchifist; perhaps you will 
be more reasonable now? 

But Nguyen blazed: Tricks, 
Russian! You have tricked me, I 
see, but it is not important. If 
I must die, I die gladly, for I have 
no wish to outlive the Great Pal- 
ace. If the world cannot be Cao- 
dai, let me perish! 

There it was again! Even Sem- 
yon frowned. 

Nguyen was roaring on: 
Name your conditions! I refuse 



them all! Filth and slime, killers, 
vermin! You have us, but I spit 
on you! 

It was my turn to argue with 
Nguyen. But I didnt do it. There 
was a sudden queer flash, quick 
and gone. 

Elsie put her hand on my arm. 
What  what   It had been 
like lightning, but there were no 
clouds; I couldnt understand it. 

Semyon understood it, though. 
He understood it very well. He 
moaned something in Russian, his 
face gone suddenly sick. He 
nodded to me and said conversa- 
tionally: The clouds again, you 
see, Logan. Climbing trees on the 
horizon. That was silly, because 
I had just looked and there 
werent any clouds. 

There hadnt been any. But 
now there was one. 

Like Irkutsk once more, said 
Semyon, and gestured with his 
gun to the horizon. I looked, in- 
credulous, as the mounting cloud 
leaped and spread, and then the 
concussion hit us from the distant 
nuclear blast. 

XIX 

TF7B NESTLED on the bottom, 

^ a mile off shore, and waited. 
Waited for what? Not for some 
miracle to put fuel in our tanks; 
there was no hope of that. Not for 
someone to rescue us; the U.N. 
would never come near Madagas- 



SLAVE SHIP 



133 



car and the Caodais would not 
rescue but kill. Not even for the 
world to come to an end. That 
had already begun. We just 
waited. 

Semyon was comforting the 
animals; Elsie and Nina were sit- 
ting inspecting each other in si- 
lence. 

We had taken a prisoner, 
old Nguyen himself, and he was 
bound where once we had bound 
the late pacifist Winnington. Too 
bad he was dead, I told myself  
he would have been delighted 
with the way things were working 
out. Because his blind dream, the 
war to bring peace by destroying 



all warriors on Earth, was already 
started. 

Nguyen said heavily from his 
comer: Incredible. He was star- 
ing reflectively at Semyon and 
the dogs. They are your animals; 
you use them as slaves. Some you 
kill and eat, do you not? The Cao- 
dai does not eat flesh; that seems 
horrible to us. And yet  they 
love you. 

Semyon patted Josie. We love 
them! he said defiantly. 

Nguyen shrugged. It is well 
known that you love everyone 
and everything. It accounts for 
the satellite bombings as easily 
as for your slaughterhouses. 




134 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



W Shut up, old man! said Sem- 
yon. 

He crooned to the dogs while 
' Elsie flared up. 

Put a gag in his mouth. I'm 
sick of Caodai hypocrisy. The 
Western atheists do this and the 

I Western atheists do that, and we 
m older away in their prison 
camps while they pretend that 
the faults all ours. Gag him or 
Ill shut him up myself! 

I looked in some amazement at 
j my warrior bride. 

 For I remembered Elsie. She 
was a quiet and biddable girl 
when we married  not counting 
her habit of volunteering, of 
course. Id never heard her 
scream at anyone  at anyone 
at all, not even me. True, Nguyen 
was the arch-enemy and she must 
have had pitiful fantasies of a 
chance like this while she was in 
the concentration camp. But even 
so  

Not the least of the problems 
of the Big Cold War, I thought, 
would come when the Elsies and 
the Myself s tried to get back to 
where we could recognize each 
other again. 

' Nina Merriam was collecting 
herself again. She was an Intelli- 
gence officer and she, too, had no 
doubt had ridiculous dreams of a 
chance like this. Now then! she 
said briskly to the pope of the 
, Caodai. Tell me what you were 
doing here. 

SLAVE SHIP 




135 



IJE LOOKED at her calmly. I 
ask you to tell me, she 
wheedled. Please. There is no 
use to keep a secret, is there? 
She offered him a cigarette and 
smiled, woman-to-man. 

An admirable performance, 
commented Nguyen. I do not 
smoke, but your interrogation is 
splendid. 

Thank you. Why did you 
leave Cambodia for this lousy lit- 
tle island? 

He shrugged. 

Nina smiled again. Good. You 
stick to your principles. I dont 
suppose any of us will last twenty- 
four more hours, but we might as 
well go on with it, just as if it 
mattered whether you gave us in- 
formation or I obtained it. So I 
shall continue to ask questions 
and you will answer only where 
it doesnt matter. Correct? 

Nguyen nodded wearily. 

Semyon cut in: You could at 
least tell us what is happening, 
old man. There is no secret about 
that. 

Nguyen closed his eyes. The 
end of the world is happening. 
Your ship attacked us in our own 
waters. We retaliated. Your peo- 
ple retailiated against our retalia- 
tion   

The satellite bombs? 

You have seen one of them, 
said Nguyen Yat Hugo. You 
must realize that our bombs are 
falling, too. 

136 



Nina whimpered: But why? 
You must have known it was the 
end for all of us! 

Semyon raged: Couldnt you 
wait, old man? Your weapon was 
too slow, was it? The burning and 
killing did not satisfy you, so you 
must unleash the satellite bombs. 
Nguyen said hoarsely: Our 
weapon? What weapon is that? 
I do not know your name for 
it, Semyon retorted contemptu- 
ously. We call it the Glotch; it 
is a burning fire that strikes the 
head and neck and   

The stern, stiff old face of 
Nguyen was cracking. No, 
he cut in, shaking his head. 

It was incredible, but you 
couldnt doubt the expression on 
his face. 

I stammered: It  it isnt 
your weapon? 

It is not, said Nguyen with 
passion. We Caodai are on our 
knees before it! 

We stared at each other. 

If it wasnt a Caodai weapon  
and Elsie confirmed that it had 
struck them as hard as us  
And if it wasnt our own 
weapon, which it was not  
Whose weapon was it? 

44rpoO LATE, too late! whis- 
*- pered Nguyen, looking 
through our periscopic sights. We 
had surfaced and the smoking 
coast of Madagascar was a mile 
or less away. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Maybe the damage is only 
local, I said. Can you raise any- 
one on the radio, Nina? 

She shook her head. Every- 
bodys jamming. 

Fall-out negligible, Semyon 
reported from the aft lookout 
ports. There must have been an 
onshore wind. One shouldnt swim 
too long in these waters, though. 
I said to the pope of the Cao- 
dai: If we find a spot on the 
coast where we can safely land, 
can you conduct us to a place 
where we can radio the U.N. 
forces? 

He spread his hands, his face 
unemotional. I can try. 

We havent any other choice, 
Logan, Elsie reminded me. I no- 
ticed that her hand was in mine. 
Even if we could refuel this boat, 
we could scarcely navigate it back 
across the Atlantic. 

Man your stations, I ordered. 
Nguyen, I assume you havent 
any hailing signal we could use 
for a safe-conduct? It would be a 
help, if a Caodai ship should spot 
us. 

There is none. 

Full speed south then, I said. 
As long as the fuel holds out. 

It held out better than I had 
expected; we made nearly ten 
miles before the engines began to 
splutter. While we still had steer- 
age way, I spun the rudder wheel 
and we slanted in on a sandy 
beach. 

SLAVE SHIP 



There were concrete pillboxes 
and chevaux-de-frise, and God 
knows how many electronic and 
sonar alarms we triggered as we 
beached. But there apparently 
were very few Caodais at the fil- 
ter centers that day, after the 
bombs had fallen. Our only real 
danger  from that particular 
source, at least  was that some- 
one would notice we had landed, 
on a radar remote, and send over 
a nike to home in on us to save 
the trouble of investigating. 

We ran up from the beach, 
as far away as we could get before 
our breath gave out, in case a 
wandering patrol should happen 
by. 

There is, said the pope, a 
command post somewhere about. 
I consecrated it myself two days 
ago. 

We sent one of the monkeys 
up a tree, but she either couldnt 
understand what we wanted or 
her short simian vision didnt let 
her detect the building we had 
described. Semyon, cursing in 
Russian, tried climbing to see for 
himself. But we couldnt get high 
enough to see, any of us. 

It is this way, said Nguyen 
strongly, and what could we do 
but follow his lead? 

And he led us right into a trap. 

T here were Coadais all 

over the place. They swarmed 
from the command post like ter- 

137 



mites from a hill; there was a 
rattle of small-arms fire, and rush- 
ing brown-skinned men in uni- 
forms, and it was all over before 
we could move. For a moment 
when they jumped us, I had old 
Nguyen in front of my gun and I 
dont know why I didnt pull the 
trigger. 

Treacherous beast! sobbed 
Semyon. We trusted you and 
you betrayed us! And I felt much 
the same. 

No! cried Nguyen, and he 
bellowed something at the Cao- 
dai soldiers. They gave him an 
argument. Apparently he wasnt 
recognized, but they took us all 
to the command post and there 
was a long, complicated discus- 
sion in French too fast for my 
ears. Nina, following it as closely 
as she could, explained: 

They think hes an impostor 
and the fat one is all for shooting 
the lot of us. Somebodys going to 
get a picture of the pope and com- 
pare. 

They brought the picture  a 
ceremonial portrait draped in yel- 
low bunting, as remote a likeness 
to the real man in its own pretti- 
fying way as the caricatures in 
our latrines had been in theirs. 

But it convinced them. So all 
we had to do was arrange to use 
their radio, get in touch with the 
U.N. command in Washington, 
stop the war and clear up the 
mess. 

138 



We never got past Step One. 
Jamming  loud and furious, jam- 
ming by the Caodais and jam- 
ming by us. There were no radio 
communications anywhere in the 
world. 

XX 

T^OT only were we the ones 

 who were trying to stop the 
war  it looked as though we had 
started it. For the naval action 
that Monmouth precipitated had 
spread. The Caodais had sunk 
her. A U.N. fleet had made a dar- 
ing raid into interdicted waters 
to try to rescue her. In retaliation, 
the Caodais had raided the Carib- 
bean again. In retaliation for that, 
a strike against Cebu. In retalia- 
tion for that  

It had wound up with the satel- 
lite bombs. 

We looked at the situation map 
in the radio room and it was like 
the end of the world. There had 
been at least eighty fusion bombs 
dropped. 

And a weary, jittery black ra- 
dioman in a Caodai uniform was 
trying to get through with the 
message that might stop it all; 
but it was hopeless. 

The radioman glanced at us 
and shrugged. Je my perds, vo- 
tre saintete, he said. Je ne puis 
pas. 

Nguyen said tunelessly: He 
cannot get through. 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



A sous-tenente who spoke fair 
English cleared his throat and 
said: Sir, perhaps if we have pa- 
tience, a time will come when we 
can get through. There have been 
breaks in the jamming; we re- 
ceived messages for nearly half 
an hour this morning. 

There will be no more breaks 
 except as the stations are 
bombed off the air. Nguyen 
smiled wryly. It is that which we 
wish to prevent. 

Semyon looked up from the 
animals. Fantastic, he said, his 
eyes round. It is not your wea- 
pon. It is not our weapon. Yet we 
bomb each other. 

Nina Willette was still an In- 
telligence officer. She asked: 
Have you really lost many peo- 
ple to this burning thing  I sup- 
pose I cant call it the Glotch any 
more. 

Nguyen hesitated only a mo- 
ment. Then he confessed: More 
than seven hundred thousand. 
Nearly every one of our  what 
is your word?  our telepathists; 
and a few others. And you? 

It was Ninas turn to hesitate. 
Still, he had been frank with her, 
or had seemed to. I have no offi- 
cial information. Perhaps half a 
million. 

Half a million! Semyon and 
Elsie and I stared back and forth 
among ourselves. So many, I 
thought, how can there have been 
so many? But the more I thought. 



the more plausible it got. For 
even in my own small experience, 
there had been half a dozen or 
more. 

Half a million  one out of 
every five hundred or so on the 
North American continent! 

E lsie, surprisingly, 

grinned unhappily, and in 
that moment, she was my Elsie 
again. She took my hand. No 
more calling up your wife just to 
see how she is, Logan. Its too ex- 
pensive now  if this thing knocks 
off the espers, theyll raise their 
rates. Is it always espers?- 

All, said Nguyen. Nearly all 
professionals, plus a few others 
who had recently been sensitized. 
And with you? 

I think so, said Nina. You 
understand that it was a highly 
classified matter with us  but I 
think so. 

You see? Elsie clutched my 
hand. From now on, esping will 
be only on matters of the gravest 
importance  on matters  on   
She stared at me, then word- 
lessly at the useless radio. 

On matters, she proclaims, of 
the gravest importance! howled 
Semyon. But naturally! They 
cannot jam the telepathic wave, 
however hard they try. It is our 
way to reach America! 

Our way to reach America. 
But we didnt have an esper 
at hand to do it. 



SLAVE SHIP 



139 



Nguyen sent scouts racing 
across the Madgascan littoral in 
all directions and they came back 
with psychologists, with Caodai 
military communications men, 
with a mixed bag of assorted pro- 
testing black, brown and yellow 
men and women. But not an esper 
in the lot. 

Nguyen snapped: If you had 
not killed them off   He sagged. 
My apology. If they had not 
died through this thing we both 
wish to combat, it would be easy. 
But there is scarcely a telepathist 
in all the lands of the Great Pal- 
ace. Hardly even a man who was 
sensitized, much less an expert. 

Elsie looked at me and shook 
her head urgently. But all the 
same, I cleared my throat and 
said : 

I was sensitized only a few 
weeks ago. 

I was sensitized last year, 
Nina Willette volunteered sud- 
denly. 

No one else said anything at 
all. 

Then Elsie burst out: Thats 
ridiculous, Logan! Youre no es- 
per; you only paid your money 
to use one. Good heavens, I was 
part of the same hookup, so if 
you   

I was sending, I told her. 
You were only receiving. 

But, Logan, its dangerous! 
You heard what this man said. 
Its bad enough in America, but 

140 



in Caodai territory, esping is a 
quick way to die. Dont do it! Let 
that girl try! 

T hen she looked me in the 
eye and stopped. Im sorry, 
darling, she said defeatedly. 

I was sensitized more re- 
cently than Nina, I reminded 
her. 

I know, shq answered, almost 
inaudibly. 

It, uh, it probably isnt really 
dangerous. I still have my hel- 
met. Ill just take it off to see if 
I can reach some American es- 
per. Then as soon as Ive got 
through   

She reached up and kissed me, 
hard. Then she turned away. Get 
on with it, she said over her 
shoulder. 

We talked to one of the psy- 
chologists Nuygens patrols had 
rounded up, a faded tan-skinned 
man with a bulbous face and a 
thin black mustache, who claimed 
to know a little about the theory 
of ESP. 

The sous-tenente translated: 
You cannot reach anyone ex- 
cept a trained esper or one with 
whom you have had a  a  ex- 
cuse, but what is the English 
word for rapport? 

Rapport. Get cracking, said 
Nina impatiently. 

The sous-tenente pursed his 
lips. Curious. Well, then, you 
must try to reach someone with 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



whom you have formerly been 
in contact. Preferably an esper, 
if there is one. Think of him, and 
of the place where you saw him 
last, and of the sounds and smell 
of the room; recreate it all in 
your mind. But do not linger on 
a single person, for perhaps he 
is dead. Try one as best you can. 
If no answer, try another. You 
comprehend? 

I comprehend, I said. Lets 
go. 

We took off our aluminum 
helmets  that I, for one, had 
lived in, slept in, even bathed 
with for weeks. We lay down on 
hard cots in a room of the com- 
mand post and they closed the 
door. 

And then we tried to telepath. 

It was a funny sensation  
something like trying to flex the 
fingers on a third hand. I was 
straining muscles that didnt ex- 
ist, reaching through the void 
with limbs I did not own, shout- 
ing with vocal cords that should 
have been in the base of my skull 
and were not. In the hands of the 
esper, it had been quick and easy. 
There was the gray wandering 
and the sense of touching, and 
there was a contact. 

Now  nothing. 

%^E LAY there like a pair of 

 idiots. Could we ever reach 
anyone? Ridiculous, I thought. 
Could a jellyfish solve quadratic 



equations? The brain tissue, 
whatever it was that held the 
ESP-power, simply did not exist 
in us; we were not espers. 

I belligerently followed direc- 
tions, daring something to hap- 
pen. I thought of Giordano and 
his office on the Venetian Cause- 
way. 

Nothing. 

I thought of the smell of rot- 
ting palm trees and hibiscus, the 
warmth of the early summer 
Miami air, the way his breath 
had rasped as he was helping me 
reach Elsie. 

Nothing. 

All right, I said, I give up and 
thought of another esper, the in- 
competent one in Providence  

And I got Giordano. 

Peevishly: Who the hell are 
you? Dont you know this is dan- 
gerous? 

Not words, of course. Ive ex- 
plained that esping is not a mat- 
ter of words. But an irritation, 
and a question, and a warning. 

I tried  as a blind castaway 
might try to spot a sail on the 
horizon  I tried, ineptly and 
without knowing whether I was 
succeeding, to convey what I had 
to say: The Glotch is not a Cao- 
dai weapon. It kills them as well 
as us. Tell the high command. 
Tell them to stop the bombs. The 
Caodai didnt start the war. They 
are dying as rapidly as we. Stop 
it, stop it, until we find out . 



SLAVE SHIP 



141 



Until, finally, an incredulous- 
ness from Giordano, an under- 
standing, at last a belief and a 
promise. I could almost see him, 
seated at his desk, not in Miami 
now but in some colder, dryer 
place, staring at emptiness, con- 
versing with me. He was nodding, 
promising  

Bright yellow fireflies came 
between us. 

I shook my head and the rap- 
port was gone. No more Gior- 
dano, no more sense of touch. 

But the fireflies were still 
there. They lanced through the 
base of my neck. I yelled out 
loud and clawed for the helmet 
I had dropped beside my cot. 
The pain was worse than that 
night along the drive at Miami 
Beach, worse than anything I had 
ever felt. I got the helmet and 
jammed it onto a head filled with 
hurting and flame. 

Help! I bawled, and I won- 
dered if the door was really open- 
ing, if people were really burst- 
ing in, if that was really Elsie 
clutching me in her arms. 

My head rolled to one side 
and I caught a glimpse of the 
cot next to mine. 

There was something there, 
something that had been a per- 
son, but it wasnt Nina Merriam 
 not with blackness and horror 
where the pretty young face had 
been, not with the charred agony 
that was crisped into the expres- 



sion. Preposterous! It was a 
seared corpse. It couldnt be Nina 
Merriam! 

But it was. So I found out  
more than a week later, when 
they dared remove the needles, 
when they had stopped enough 
of the pain and patched enough 
of the ruin around my head and 
neck, and had begun to think I 
might yet live  the only man in 
all the world who had survived 
not a single attack of the what- 
ever-it-was, but two. 

A nd ELSIE was there. We 
didnt talk for a while. And 
then we couldnt stop. The war 
was over; I had after all got 
through, and so had Nina  be- 
fore she died. It was good that 
we both had made it, for they 
would scarcely have believed 
one. But you do not lie through 
ESP and two of us could hardly 
be mistaken. 

So they had stopped the 
bombs and the satellites hung 
silent in the sky. And the Cao- 
dais and we had begun to com- 
pare notes and to look for an- 
swers. Volunteers had offered 
themselves as sacrifice. Some had 
died, sitting in darkened rooms 
with opened photographic shut- 
ters waiting to catch the track 
of whatever came flashing in as 
they esped, a few coughing their 
lungs out in improvised cloud 
chambers, a great many sur- 



142 



GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



rounded by infinite varieties of 
scientific equipment that tested 
and measured and felt. 

After a day, I was well enough 
to walk about. The grafts from 
the skin bank were healing and 
the damage to the nervous sys- 
tem was slight. And I had a visi- 
tor. I was in a naval hospital out- 
side of what had been New 
Washington and Nguyen had 
flown there to sign the Bethesda 
Compact. And he came to see me 
and to say: Thank you. 

That was the greatest shock of 
all. For what? I asked, blank. 

Nguyen laughed silently. We 
are in your debt, my lieutenant, 
he said. We have learned to get 
along together, the Caodai and 
the West, and that is good. And 
even more, through your work 
with the dogs and monkeys and 
seals, we have learned to get 
along with our animals. And only 
just in time, my lieutenant. Only 
just in time. 

In time for what? 

What you call the Glotch. It 
wasnt our weapon or yours. In 
fact, you see, it was not a weapon 
at all. Today the news is made: 
It is life. 

Life? 

He nodded somberly. Living 
things. Telepathic. Tiny, below 
the threshold of visibility. They 
seek to communicate when they 
sense the subtle esper flow and 
because their structure and ours 

SLAVE SHIP 



cannot exist together  they die. 
And perhaps that could be borne, 
but we die, too. As you know. 

Life! I breathed. How on 
Earth 

Ah, no! he cried. Not on 
Earth at all. Mars? I dont know 
 but not of the Earth, that is 
sure. And that is why we were 
only just in time. For now that 
we have learned to get along 
with each other, we start, this 
second, to learn to get along with 
Them. They have been attracted, 
the scientists think, by our esp- 
ing and perhaps also our bombs 
from outside. I doubt They will 
ever leave us alone again. 

Mars! I breathed. It was 
fantastic. 

And also, of course, wrong  
but how thoroughly wrong, we 
did not discover until Venus once 
more swam close to Earth. 

Nina Merriam would have 
liked to know. I wished somehow 
I could tell her. 

But I had Elsie to discuss it 
with. And, pretty soon, we had 
other things to talk about  dis- 
charge for both of us, a home, a 
job, a family  all the wonder- 
fully prosaic things that help 
wipe out years of loneliness and 
horror. 

But neither of us has forgotten 
Nina. 

We dont want to and we 
wont. 

 FREDERIK POHL 
143 



(^Continued from page 4) 
Arthur was preparing to invade 
Korea, the attack was scorn- 
fully called Operation Common 
Knowledge because everything 
was known about it, including the 
target. 

Hah! the Chinese must have 
said in top-level conference. Very 
clumsy, trying to make us think 
we will strike at Inchon. So they 
dug in everywhere but at Inchon 
 and that, of course, was exactly 
where MacArthur landed. 

This kind of disarmingly di- 
rect thinking was proposed for the 
problem of captured soldiers. By 
ordering them to broadcast or sign 
any confession demanded of 
them, all propaganda would have 
been denied the enemy. The pro- 
posal was defeated, but Im not 
sure I see why. 

Maybe because this approach 
is expected from young children 
only. 

A father with a very large 
package joshed his son, who, 
wearing a Superman costume, 
was leaping all around the yard: 
Come on. Superman, help me get 
this inside the house. The child 
sized up the bulk and heft of the 
package. Im not Superman, he 
said realistically. Im just a lit- 
tle boy and I cant carry any- 
thing like that. 

Lincoln Steffens Autobiogra- 
phy shows how flabbergasting 
literal thinking can be on an adult 

144 



level. A Philadelphia political 
ring had five huge graft projects 
to put across. The lieutenants 
opinion was to pull them separ- 
ately, giving the public time to 
cool off in between. The big boss, 
however, decided to spring all 
five at once. They did  and such 
cosmic gall demoralized all op- 
position. 

The devious minds contribute 
immensely, especially- to the sci- 
ences, but mainly to provide the 
data that the rare Newtons and 
Einsteins  > unswervingly literal, 
all of them  reduce to unbelieva- 
bly simple equations, which the 
devious scoff at; nothing could be 
that simple. 

The method is equally clear  
find the most direct solution. Sci- 
ence fiction has done that often. 
Fifty years ago. Wells saw that 
the way to conquer gravity was 
to nullify it. (Verne scoffed.) 
Now theres an anti-gravity re- 
search program, while Vernes 
elaborate Moon cannon has long 
been obsolete. 

Does that mean the literal 
mind is superior to the devious? 
No, they need each other. 

Its just that the literal mind, 
traveling in a straight line, has to 
wait for the devious to catch up. 
It will. 

It always has  so far, at 
least. 

But if only they were tolerant 
of each other! 

 H.L.GOLD 

GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




SCIENCE 



ICTIC 



IS ALL YOU PAY FOR ANY 
OF THESE GREAT BOOKS 

w/ien you /om fhe C/ub 

Just Pick the Three Books You Want Then 
Rush the Valuable Coupon Below At Once/ 



THE TREASURY OF 
SCIENCE.FICTION CLASSICS 

World-rpnowned stories that 
have stood the test of time  by 
H. G. Wells, Jules Veme, Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, Aldous 
Huxley, Philip Wylie, Edgar 
Allan Poe, E. M. Forster, F. 
Scott Fitzgerald, etc. 704 pages. 
(PubL ed. $2.95) 



OMNIBUS OF SCIENCE FICTION 

43 top-stories by outstanding 
authors . stories of Wonders 
of Earth and Man . of start- 
ling inventions ... of visitors 
from Outer Space ... of Far 
Traveling . Adventures in 
Dimension . World of To- 
morrow. 562 pages. (Pubi. ed. 
$3.50) 



THE ASTOUNDING 
SCIENCE-FICTION ANTHOLOGY 

A story about the first A-Bomb 
. written before it was in- 
vented! A story of the movie ma- 
chine that shows newsreels of 
any past event. Plus a score of 
other best tales from a dozen 
years of Astounding Science- 
Fiction magazine by its editor, 
John W. Campbell, Jr. (Publ. ed. 
$3.95) 

THE BEST FROM FANTASY 
AND SCIENCE-FICTION 

Selected stories from Fantasy 
and Science-Fiction Magazine. 
The woman who became her own 
daughter . atomic power from 
beans . the man that lived 300 
years . gambling on a strange 
planet . and many others. 

iPubl. ed. $3.25) 



NoW-THE best NEWSCIENCE-FICTION BOOKS 
FOR ONLY M20 EACH! 



WORLD OUT OF MIND 

By J. T. MTntosh. Creatures 
from Outer Space (disguised 
as humans) come to Earth to 
prepare for invasion. And one 
of these super-saboteurs wins 
the worlds highest office and is 
chosen to lead the Earth's de- 
fense! iPubl. ed. $3.00) 



ASSIGNMENT IN TOMORROW 

A complete short novel, 3 nov- 
ellettes and 12 short stories com- 
bine to make a truly scalp-ting- 
ling volume about the cosmic life 
of the future  edited by Fred- 
erik Pohl. Asorbing stories Jhat 
provide a chilling glimpse into 
tomorrow. (.Publ. ed. $3.50) 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 

By Alfred Bester. Ben Reich 
is the most important man in the 
Solar System. In his drive for 
power he has killed a man in 
cold blood. But now he is forever 
man 



I MAGINE  ANY 3 of these full-size, brand-new science-fiction books haunted by * y?ectre . 

 ^yours for just $11 Each is crammed with the science thrills of tmin no facet (PubL ed. $3.( 



the future . written by the 
most sought-after science-fiction | 

' . I 



00 ) 



by I 

... :e-fict 
authors of today. A $8.95 to 1 
$10.95 value, complete and in | 
handsome permanent bindings. I 



WHICH 3 



DO YOU WANT $100o 

FOR ONLY   



Each month the SCIENCE- 

FICTION BOOK CLUB brings a SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB, Dept. GX-5, Garden City, New York 

you only the finest brand-new  ^ , t., jc* 

full-length books FOR ONLY $1 I Please rush me the 3 books checked below, as my gift books and first 
EACH (plus a few cents ship- | selection. Bill me only $1 for all three (plus few cents shipping 
ping charge) even though they  charges), and enroll me as a member of the Science-Fiction Book 
cost $2.50, $3.00 and up in pub- I Club. Every month send me the Clubs free bulletin, Things to 
lishers editions I Each months * Come, so that I may decide whether or not I wish to receive the 
selection is described IN AD- I coming selection described therein. For each book I accept, I will pay 
VANCE. You take ONLY those I only $1 plus shipping. I_do not have to take a book every month (only 
books you really want 
four a year. 

SEND NO MONEY 

Mail Coupon TODAYI 
We KNOW you will enjo' 
inembership in this new bool 
club. To PROVE it, we are tpak- 



time after accepting four selections. 

SPECIAL NO RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted, I may return 
all books in 7 days, pay nothing and this membership will be cancelled! 



boo^ ^ 9 Astounding Science-Fiction 



I Assignment in Tomorrow 



 Anthology 

choice of ANY 3 of the new  Science-Fiction 



choice ot AW Y 3 ot the new  
Science-Fiction anthologies  at I Name... 
ONLY $l FOR ALL THREE. J 
Two are your gift books for join- I Address- 
ing; the other is your first selec- * Citv 
tion. This liberal offer may have | 



J Demolished Man 
I Omnibus of Science-Fiction 
I World Out of Mind 
I Treasury of Science-Fiction 
Classics 



(PLEASE print) 



^Zone... 



to be withdrawn at any time. So 
mail coupon RIGHT NOW to:  

SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB I 
Dept. GX-5, Carden City. N. Y. * 



Selection price in Canada $1.10 
tion Club, 105 Boni' * 

U.S. and Canada.) 



shaping. Address Science-Fic- 






The Most Generous Offer Ever Made By 




, wtammm 

fANTASY and 

saiMdfKrm 



TAKE 



OF THESE 

THRILLING MASTERPIECES OF 



SCIENCE-FICTIOH 

' i/of$WOO 



WITH 

MEMBERSHIP 



A $8.95 to $10.95 value  
you pay just $1.00 for any 3! 



SEE OTHER SIDE 
COMPLETE DETAILS 



H eres an oi7'-r that is as thrillinff as the incredi- 
ble, spine-tingling stories crammed between 
the covers of these books! These volumes contain 
not only top-drawer science-fiction, but also 
science facts by outstanding authorities. Hand- 
some, permanent bindings. Any 3 of them would 
normally cost you $8.95 to $10.95 in publishers 
original editions  but all you pay is just $1.00 



w'hen you join the Clubl 

This generous offer is made to introduce you to 
the SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLlB, a won- 
derfully new' idea in bringing you the best of the 
new science-fiction books  at a mere fraction of 
their usual cost! Take advantage of this offer now 
 pick your 3 books and mail coupon on other 
side of this page TODAY!Founding Father
By J. F. BONE
Illustrated by RITTER
The creatures were huge, hairy, surly--and
the males were always chasing the females.
But what else could you expect of mammals?
I
"We need data," I said as I manipulated the scanner and surveyed our
little domain of rocks and vegetation. "The animate life we have
collected so far is of a low order."
"There is nothing here with intelligence," Ven agreed, gesturing at the
specimens in front of us. "Although they're obviously related to our
race, they're quite incapable of constructing those artifacts we saw
on our way down."
"Or of building electone communications or even airboats," I added.
"I expect that there is only one way to get what we want--and that's
to go looking for it," Ven said as she smoothed her antennae with a
primary digit. "I also expect," she added acidly, "that there might
have been other places from which it wouldn't be so hard to start
looking. Or did you _have_ to set us down in this isolated spot?"
I glared at her and she flushed a delicate lavender. "Do you think
I landed here because I _wanted_ to?" I asked with some bitterness,
inflating my cheek pouches to better express my disgust. "There were
less than two vards of useful fuel left on the reels when I cut the
drives. There isn't enough to take us across this valley. We came
close to not making planetfall here at all."
"Oh," Ven said in a small voice, vocalizing as she always does when she
is embarrassed. Like most females, she finds it difficult to project
normally when she is under emotional stress. Afraid or angry she can
blow a hole in subspace; but embarrassed, her projections are so faint
that I have to strain my antennae to receive them.
Her aura turned a shamefaced nacreous lavender. I couldn't stay angry
with her. She was lovely, and I was proud to be her mate. The Eugenics
Council had made an unusually good match when they brought us together.
The months we had spent aboard ship on our sabbatical had produced no
serious personality conflicts. We fitted well, and I was more happy
than any Thalassan had a right to be.
"We shall have to try other measures," I said. "Although there aren't
very many natives hereabouts, we had better start looking for them
rather than wait for them to look for us." I felt disappointed. I was
certain that we made enough disturbance coming down for them to be here
in droves, which was why I had the robots camouflage the ship to look
like the surrounding rocks. There could be such a thing as too much
attention.
"They could have mistaken us for a meteor," Ven said.
"Probably," I agreed. "But it would have saved a great deal of trouble
if one of them had come to us." I sighed. "Oh well."
I added, "it was only a hope, at best."
"I could explore," Ven offered.
"I was about to suggest that," I said. "After all, the atmosphere is
breathable although somewhat rich in oxygen, and the gravity is not too
severe. It would be best to wait until dark before starting out. There
may be danger. After all, this is an alien world, and Authority knows
what's out there."
Her antennae dropped, her aura dimmed to gray and her integument turned
a greenish black. "It doesn't sound pleasant," she said.
  *  *  *  *  *
The sun dipped below the horizon with an indecently gaudy display of
color. After the last shades of violet had faded, I opened the airlock
and watched Ven, a darker blot in the darkness of the night, slip away
into the shadows.
She went unarmed. I wanted her to take a blaster, but she refused,
saying that she had never fired one, wouldn't know what to do with
one--and that its weight would hold her back. I didn't like it. But I
was unable to go with her, and it was better that she did as she wished
at this time.
I sat for a while in the entrance port watching the slow wheel of the
stars across the heavens, and for a moment I wished that I were a
female with the rugged physique to withstand this gravity. As it was,
the beauty of the night was lost on me. I breathed uncomfortably as the
pressure crushed my body and made every joint and muscle ache. Males,
I reflected gloomily, weren't what they were in the old days. Too much
emphasis on mind, and not enough on body, had made us a sex of physical
weaklings.
I wondered bitterly if a brain was as worthwhile as the Council
insisted.
The next few hours were miserable. I worried about Ven, imagining a
number of unpleasant things which might have happened to her. I dragged
myself into the control room and fiddled with the scanners, trying the
infra and ultra bands as well as the normal visible spectrum in the
hopes of seeing something. And just as I was beginning to feel the
twinges of genuine fear, I heard Ven.
Her projection was faint. "Help me, Eu! Help me!"
I stumbled to the entrance port, dragging a blaster with me. "Where are
you?" I projected. I couldn't see her, but I could sense her presence.
"Here, Eu. Just below you. Help me. I can't make it any farther!"
Somehow I managed it. I don't know from where the strength came, but
I was on the ground lifting her, pushing her onto the flat surface of
the airlock--clambering up--dragging her in and closing the lock behind
us. I looked down at her with pride. Who would have thought that I,
a male, could lift a mature female into a ship's airlock even against
normal gravity? I chuckled shakily. Strange things happen to a body
when its owner is stressed and its suprarenals are stimulated.
She looked up at me. "Thank you," she said simply. But there was more
behind the words than the bare bones of customary gratitude.
  *  *  *  *  *
I helped her into the refresher and as she restored her tired body I
pelted her with numerous questions.
"Did you succeed?" I asked.
"Better than I expected."
"Did you find a native?"
"Two of them." The cubicle glowed a pale green as her strength came
back.
"Where?"
"Two vursts from here--down the hill. They're camped near a road. They
have a big ground car with them."
"Did you see them?"
"Yes."
"What did they look like?"
The radiance in the cubicle flicked out. "They're horrible!" Ven said.
"Monstrous! Four or five times our size! I never saw anything so
hideous!"
"Did they see you?"
"No, I don't think so. They weren't looking in my direction at first.
And I don't think they can sense, because I was frightened and they
didn't respond to my projection." She was beginning to recover.
"You couldn't have been too frightened," I said. "I didn't hear
you--and you can reach farther than two vursts."
"Mostly I was repelled," Ven admitted.
"Why?"
"I don't know. They smelled bad, but it was more than that. There was
something about them that made my antennae lie flat against my ears.
Anyway--I did a foolish thing." The cubicle turned a pale embarrassed
lavender.
"What did you do?" I demanded.
"I ran away," Ven said. "And I made a lot of noise."
"All right--all right," I said impatiently. "Go ahead and tell the rest
of it."
"By the time I stopped running I was down at the bottom of the hill,"
Ven said. "I was dead tired--and with all that rock to climb to get
back to the ship. I didn't really think I'd make it."
"But you did," I said proudly. "You're a real Thalassan--pure green."
The cubicle slowly brightened again.
"Can you find them again?" I asked.
"Of course. I wasn't lost at any time. If I hadn't panicked, I'd have
been back a whole lot sooner."
"Can you go now?"
  *  *  *  *  *
She shivered with distaste. "I can," she said, "but I don't want to."
"That's nonsense. We can't let a little physical revulsion stop us.
After all, there are some pretty grim things to be seen in this
universe."
"But nothing like this! I tell you, Eu, they're horrible! That's the
only word that can describe them."
"Take a stat projector--" I began.
"Aren't you coming?" she asked.
"Two vursts on this planet? What do you think I am?"
Her face hardened. "I don't know," she said coldly, "but I do know
this--if you don't come, I won't go."
I groaned. From her aura I could tell she meant every word. It
angered me, too, because Thalassan females usually don't defy a male.
"Remember," I said icily, "that you're not the only female on Thalassa."
"We're not on Thalassa," she said. Her aura was a curious leaden color,
shot through with sullen red flares and blotches.
"I have no right to force you," she went on stubbornly, "but I can't
handle them alone. You simply _have_ to come."
"But Ven--I'm a physical cipher. This gravity flattens me. I won't make
it."
"You will," she said. "I'll help you. But this job needs a male mind."
It was deliberate flattery, I suppose. But there was an element of
truth in it. Ven obviously couldn't do it, and obviously she thought I
could. I couldn't help feeling pride in her need for me. I liked the
feeling. For, after all, we hadn't been mated so long that there was
too great an amount of familiarity in our relationship. The Eugenics
Council had taken care of that very effectively when we announced our
plans for our sabbatical.
"All right--I'll go," I repeated.
With a quick light movement she touched my antennae with her primary
digits. The shock ran through me clear to my pads. "You're good," she
said--and the way she said it was an accolade.
II
"This way," Ven said, emitting a faint yellow aura that lighted the
area around her. "Follow me." She staggered a little under the weight
of the equipment she was carrying. I wished that we had enough power
to energize an air sled---but we had none to spare. The robots had used
up most of our scanty power metal reserves in camouflaging the ship and
the adaptor had taken the rest. This was going to be a miserable trip.
It was going to be painful, uncomfortable and perhaps even dangerous.
It was.
We went across rocks, through sharp-twigged brush--across the saw-edged
grass of the meadow below us, over more rocks, and down-hill along a
faint double trail that never seemed to end. I was nearly dead with
weariness when Ven's aura flicked off and the dark closed in. My
proprioceptors were screaming as I sank to the ground and panted the
rich air of this world in and out of my aching chest.
"They're just ahead," Ven whispered. "Around that next group of rocks.
Be careful."
We moved forward cautiously. "There was a fire," Ven whispered.
"There isn't now," I said. "I can't sense any heat." The night air
blew a rank odor to my nostrils. My spines stiffened! I knew what Ven
meant when she said that these natives repelled her. I had smelled that
scent before--the scent of our ancestral enemies! So _these_ were the
natives, the dominant life on this planet! I gagged, my tongue thick in
my throat.
"You see?" Ven asked.
I nodded. "It's pretty bad," I said.
"It reminds me of a zoo," Ven answered softly.
I nodded. It did and it was thoroughly unpleasant.
I strained my perception to its limits, pushing it through the gelid
darkness, searching until I found the natives. "They're asleep," I said.
"What's that?"
"Suspension of consciousness. Something like estivation."
"Oh. Then we can approach safely?"
"If we are quiet," I replied. "Sleep is broken easily and consciousness
returns quickly."
The trail deepened beyond the rocks--two rutted tracks about three
vards apart. We moved forward cautiously, our senses keyed to their
highest pitch. The night was oppressively still and every movement
rasped loudly. My breath came fast and shallow. My heart pounded and my
musk glands were actively secreting as I parted the opening to their
cloth shelter, and sensed the dim forms within.
"Stat," I projected and Ven handed me the weapon. It was almost more
than I could manage in my weakened condition, but I aimed it and fired
a full intensity blast at the nearest lumpy figure. It jerked and
flopped inside its coverings, and the second form sat up with horrid
speed!
  *  *  *  *  *
A roar of sound came from it as the air was filled with its fetid odor.
In panic I triggered a blast at the menacing figure, and it, too,
flopped and laid still.
I ran my tongue over the roof of my dry mouth and called to Ven.
"They're quiet now. Come in and see what we've got."
"Ugh!" Ven snorted as she entered the tent at my heels. "It stinks!"
"They're not the sweetest life form in the universe," I said as I
prodded the huge mound beside me, looking for reflexes that would
indicate returning consciousness.
"What are they?" Ven asked.
"Mammals," I said.
"No wonder I thought of a zoo," Ven said. "But they're so big!"
"Not on all planets," I said.
"Obviously," Ven commented. "Well--what's next? Let's get this done.
I'm suffocating!"
"Hand me the probe kit," I said.
I selected two of the longest probes and made my way up to the head of
the nearest monster. I scanned its braincase until I found the area I
wanted and inserted the probes, driving them through the heavy bone
and into the brain beneath. I clipped on the short antennae and stepped
back. "Turn the control to low," I said. "Place the clips on your
antennae. Now think of rising." The bulk beside me stirred and Ven gave
a squeak of terror. "It's all right," I assured her. "Turn the control
back to zero. This one's secure."
I went to the second and treated it like the first, and felt
a justifiable pride as it reacted. Not many men could implant
neuro-probes correctly on the first attempt. "All right, Ven. You can
go out now. Take the controls with you. I'll see what I can do to get
these brutes out of their coverings."
The tent opening swayed as Ven passed through and I bent over the
nearest form. The covering was a heavy sack closed with a slide
fastener much like the ones we used. I pulled and it opened, sending a
flood of rank scent into the fetid air. I coughed, my eyes smarting,
and found the fastener of the other sack. Retching with nausea I
staggered out of the tent.
Ven sprang forward, caught me as I was about to fall, and lowered me
gently to the ground.
"What are we going to do?" Ven asked as I lay panting at her feet.
"We're going to get them out of there," I said, "and take them back
to the ship. I didn't come all this way for nothing." I drew one of
the controls toward me, fastened the clips to my antennae, advanced
the gain and thought into it. There was a stir of movement inside and
a huge form came stumbling out. It stood there clad in loose cloth
coverings, reeking with halogen. I looked up at the dark bulk and
shivered.
"That smell!" Ven said.
  *  *  *  *  *
"We can help it a bit," I replied and turned to the control. With its
massive fore-limbs the brute ripped the cloth from its body as it moved
down-wind. I made it stand and took the other control.
"Let me do it," Ven said. "You can't handle both of them in your
condition."
"All right," I said, "but be careful."
"I will. Now what do I do?"
"Advance the intensity knob and think what you want it to do."
There was a flurry of movement inside the tent, the thrashing of a huge
body, and the second mammal burst through the opening and staggered
clumsily to a stop.
"Reduce the intensity," I said. "You're projecting too strong a
stimulus. Now uncover it and send it over with the other one to cool
off. They're more bearable when they're cold. They exude the scent from
their skin glands to compensate for temperature."
"I know," Ven said. "I studied biology." She did as I instructed and
then dropped beside me. We relaxed, gathering our strength for the
climb ahead. But I didn't recover rapidly. I could move, but the
exertion made me dizzy. The excitement was over and reaction had set
in. "I'll never make it," I said dully.
"I can help," Ven said--"a little."
"It won't be enough. You don't have the strength to carry me." I looked
at the huge bodies of the mammals gleaming pallidly in the darkness,
and suddenly I had an idea. The Slaads on Valga domesticated mammals.
They were quadrupedal, true enough, but they were still mammals. Why
couldn't I ride one of these as they did? Those great masses of muscle
should carry me easily. "I think I have a solution," I said.
"What?"
"I'll have one of them carry me."
"You can't!"
"Why not? They're controlled. And they're the only way I'll be able to
get back to the ship." I picked up the nearest controller. "Let's see
what happens."
Ven squeaked as the monster lifted me in the air and set me across its
neck. I crossed my pads and hung on. The ground seemed terribly far
away.
"How is it up there?" Ven asked.
"A little unstable," I said, "but I'll manage. Shall we go?"
We moved up the trail to the rocky abutment and turned up the hill. The
brute beneath me climbed strongly and easily.
"Wait a minute," Ven said as she turned the corner behind me, "you're
going too fast."
"Why don't you ride?" I called down to her. "This one moves easily
enough. It's much better than walking."
"I think I will," Ven replied.
  *  *  *  *  *
"This is all right," Ven said as we moved side by side up the hill.
"The fibrils on top of its head--"
"Hair," I corrected.
"The hair of this one is longer than yours. I can hold on nicely."
The big bodies of the natives moved smoothly and powerfully, their
giant strides eating up the distance we had so painfully covered some
time before. Presently we came out onto the lower edge of the meadow
below our ship.
Ven looked at me, her aura glowing pink with excitement. "I'll race you
to the ship," she cried, and dashed off with a burst of speed.
Somehow I couldn't resist the challenge in her voice. I advanced the
control knob and thought strongly. The brute jumped as though it had
been whipped and leaped into a plunging run. I clung desperately
for a moment and then relaxed as I caught the rhythm of the driving
strides. My heart pounded, but not with fear. I had never known such
exhilaration! Machines were pale compared to it. The mammal could run
like a frightened skent--and it was faster than Ven's!
I caught her halfway up the meadow, and pulled away, exulting in the
powerful muscles moving underneath me. I charged up to the grove of
trees that concealed our camouflaged ship, and brought the mammal to a
halt. It was panting, trembling, drenched with stinking sweat, but I
didn't mind. I was part of it. There was a certain amount of feedback
in a bipolar control circuit and I could feel the heat of its body,
the beat of the great heart, the rise and fall of the broad chest, the
pulse of the blood vessels in the thick neck. It was magnificent! I
laughed. I had never before felt the ecstasy of physical strength!
I turned and looked back, still tasting the pleasure of the great body
connected to my mind.
Ven drew up beside me. "Hai Yee!" she exclaimed. "What a sensation!"
"You liked it?" I asked.
"Liked it? _Liked_ it? I loved it! Didn't you?"
"I think so," I said truthfully.
"I'm going across the meadow again," Ven said as she turned her mammal
around.
"No," I said. "We have use for these two and we have no knowledge of
how much they can stand. There's no sense damaging them." I frowned as
I noticed the bloody scratches on the legs and body of her mammal.
Ven noted the direction of my gaze. "They're not as tough as I
thought," she said with sudden contrition. "But they're not too badly
damaged, are they?"
"No." I said.
I ordered the mammal to set me down. Dawn was breaking and I could
see better what we had captured. They were a male and a female.
On the whole, except for their mammalian ancestry, they conformed
to dominant-race criteria, being erect, bipedal, predatory types
with binocular vision. Their upper extremities were evolved into
manipulative organs similar to our primary digits.
The most outstanding difference was the extreme sex dimorphism,
which was obviously apparent in the brightening light. The physical
differences were carried to such lengths that it was hard to believe
that they were members of the same species.
  *  *  *  *  *
They weren't exactly ugly, yet there was something disturbing about
them. Perhaps it was the rank halogen odor of their skin glands that
were still secreting despite the coolness of the air. Or perhaps it was
merely that they were intelligent mammals. It was as though Authority
had, in a moment of cosmic humor, drawn oversized caricatures of
Thalassans and endowed them with life. I felt a subtle insult in their
presence. I suppose it showed in my aura because Ven came quickly to my
side.
"I told you they were disturbing," she said as we looked up at their
monstrous forms towering over us.
"I'm glad they're not uncontrolled," I answered, shivering a little as
I looked at them. "I suppose it's just species antipathy, but they make
me uncomfortable."
"Mammals were exterminated on Thalassa long ago, weren't they?"
"Yes," I said. "They ate our eggs."
Ven walked forward and ran her primary digits over the female's legs.
"They're quite well evolved," she said. "The skin hasn't a vestige of
scales."
"Neither does yours except at the tip of your tail," I said tartly.
"Don't get the idea that they're a primitive life form. Actually
they are a _later_ evolutionary type than we! If our ancestors had
not developed intelligence enough to realize their peril we would be
extinct--and something like them would rule Thalassa today."
Ven shivered, "How horrible! I don't like thinking about it."
"Don't," I advised.
"What are we going to do with them?" Ven asked.
"I was going to analyze them and construct a proxy, but they're far too
big to duplicate with our limited resources. I suppose the only thing
we can do is to insert control circuits and use them as they are."
"Won't that be painful?"
"Only psychically. Physically they shouldn't suffer a bit. The brain,
you know, feels no pain. It merely interprets stimuli from elsewhere."
"In mammals too?"
I shrugged. "I suppose so. Besides, what difference does it make?
Once we're through with them we can destroy them if they're too badly
damaged."
"That seems unfair."
"It's not a question of fairness. It's survival. If they don't perform
properly, we shall have to dispose of them or they'll be back here
with a whole herd. Of course, if they operate under control, we'll turn
them loose when we're through with them. I doubt that their technology
is advanced enough to recognize a bio-circuit if they saw one. And if
it is, they will have learned nothing new."
"But why can't we keep them--take them back to Thalassa? They'd make an
unusual contribution to the Central Zoo."
"I'm afraid not," I said. "I doubt if they'd survive space. The only
part of the ship large enough to hold them would be the cargo storage
compartment, and that's not shielded. A hyperjump would kill them. You
wouldn't want even them to die _that_ way, would you?"
Her aura turned gray. "No, I suppose not."
"There isn't a chance," I said, seizing her thought before it was
uttered. "It would take ten of our lifetimes to reach our nearest
outpost on normal spacedrive. Forget it."
"But--"
"Come along," I said, "I'll need your help to modify these brutes."
  *  *  *  *  *
Actually it wasn't a hard job. Their brains were well developed and
nicely compartmentalized. With our probes and instruments it was a
simple enough matter to implant the necessary organic extensions of
our instruments.
"That should do it," I murmured as I disconnected the leads I had
jury-rigged into the analyzer. "They're clean as a Fardel's tooth." I
was tired, but I had the pleasant feeling of accomplishment that comes
from working with organic matter. Possibly if I were not so interested
in History, I'd have become a medic. I do have a certain talent along
that line.
At any rate, we now had a pair of proxies. With only normal fortune
they would be completely undetectable.
"Is it all done?" Ven asked as she looked over my shoulder.
"Yes," I said. "But leave the probes in place until we test them." I
dragged my weary body once again into the control room and tried the
headgear and circuits. They functioned absolutely perfectly.
"What do we do now?" Ven's projection came to me.
"Remove the probes and send them back to their camp. There's no sense
in leaving them here."
"But Eu--"
"No," I said. "They are not toys. They're tools. They're to do a job
for us. Now stop acting like a child. When they bring us metal you can
play games with them--but not now. They're stressed, tired, and need
rest. And they're going to get it."
"Yes, Eu." Her projection was submissive.
"But don't worry," I added kindly. "You can monitor them. I installed
two extra circuits, one to the hypothalamus and the other to the
tactile centers. You will be able to feel every sensation they
experience. It will be just like having an extra body."
"Can I try it now?" she asked eagerly as she came into the control room.
"Go ahead," I said. "Put on a helmet and use the double control. Take
them back to their camp and then neutralize the controller. As for me,
I'm going to the refresher. I need it."
III
I awoke from partial estivation with Ven's projection vibrating my
antennae. "Eu! Come quickly! They're awake!"
I groaned. What did she expect? But it might be interesting to see how
they behaved. And if they panicked, someone should be there to assume
control.
I checked the chronometer. I had rested for eight satts which should be
enough. I felt as well as could be expected, so with only a few choice
Low-Thalassic expletives to help me, I managed to clamber out of the
tank and stagger into the control room. Ven already had one of the
helmets on. I picked up the other and flicked the switch to "on." It
was the male's--and he was talking. The words were gibberish, but the
thoughts behind them were easy to read.
I was part of an entity called Donald G. Carlton, a male mammal of
the human species. He was a "writer" and was mated to the female, who
was called Edith and who worked in "motion pictures." They lived in
a place called Hollywood, in a family unit structure faintly similar
to a children's creche. Custom on this world dictated that the female
take one name of her mate, which indicated that the sex was even more
subservient than female Thalassans. The male's body ached, but not
as badly as I would have expected. And, as I expected, there was no
sensitivity in the brain.
"Hey! Edith!" Donald said. "Get up!"
"Leave me alone, Don. I'm miserable," a lighter voice answered from the
lumpy sack beside him. "I had the most awful dream."
"It must be the mountain air," he replied. "I did too."
"Whatever made me think this would be fun!" Edith said. "You and your
meteor-hunting!" The sack heaved and twisted and her head appeared at
one end. "I feel like I've been worked over with a baseball bat. Oh!
My legs!"
"You're not alone," he said. "I guess it's the hard ground and these
strait-jackets they laughingly call sleeping bags."
"About that dream," Edith said. "It was horrible. There was this little
green and yellow thing that looked like a cross between a lizard and a
human being. It was sitting on my shoulders and I was naked--carrying
it around, doing what it wanted me to do! I wanted to throw it off and
stamp on it but I couldn't. I just ran and ran and all the time that
little monster sat with its legs around my neck, hooting like an owl.
Now, wasn't that something?"
Donald was very quiet. "You know," he said slowly, "essentially that
was the same dream I had."
"But that can't be! People don't have the same nightmares."
"We did."
"Then maybe--maybe it wasn't a nightmare!"
"Nonsense. We're here. We're all right. But I think perhaps we'd better
get out of here--oh, Keerist! I'm one solid bruise." He twisted around
until he found the fastenings and opened the bag. With a groan he stood
up.
Edith looked at him, her eyes wide with sudden terror. "Don," she said
in a brittle voice, "didn't you wear pajamas when you went to bed last
night?"
"Yes."
"Well, you're not wearing them now." An expression of horror crossed
her face. "And neither am I," she added in a small voice.
  *  *  *  *  *
I could feel the shock in Donald's brain as he looked down at himself.
"That's not all I'm not wearing," he said dully. "I'm shaved!"
There was a brief flurry inside the other sleeping bag. "So am I!"
Edith's voice was a whisper of fright. "That was no dream! I remember
this. The lizard gave me something that I rubbed all over myself--and
my hair came off. I didn't want to, but I couldn't help myself." Her
hands went to her head and she sighed, "Well, _that's_ all there. For a
moment I thought--"
"My skin is different," Donald interrupted thoughtfully as he inspected
himself. "It feels thicker. And I don't feel cold, although I'll bet
it's nearly freezing outside."
"Don! Don't you understand? That dream was real!" Edith said.
"Of course it was,--unless _this_ is a dream. We could be having a
nightmare about a nightmare...."
I looked at Ven.
"Just what did you do to them?" I asked.
She glowed guiltily. "I didn't know it would take their hair off," she
said. "I was worried about their scratches, and the insects were biting
them. So I made them rub on some of our skin conditioner."
I raised my digits toward the sky. "There is an Authority that looks
over fools and Thalassan females," I said. "What made you so sure our
conditioner would work on them? It might have been poisonous."
"I tried it on the male first," Ven said.
"Genius," I breathed with icy sarcasm, "sheer genius!"
"Well," she said, "it worked!" The eternal pragmatist had applied her
sole criterion. "And what's more they looked and smelled lots better
after they used it."
I shrugged, gave it up and turned my attention back to the mammals.
Edith had emerged from her sack and was standing before the male.
"Do I look like a nightmare?" she demanded.
"No. More like a skinned rabbit--ouch! What did you do that for?" He
rubbed his face where she struck him with her digits.
"There!" Edith said. "_Now_ do you think it's a dream?"
"I never did," he replied mildly. "I've never dreamed in my life. I
was just breaking it to you easy. It was real enough--even the blank
spaces. I wonder--"
"You wonder what?"
"What their reason was for capturing us and then letting us go. It
doesn't make sense. They wouldn't grab us just for fun. They're
obviously intelligent, and probably thought we would be useful to them.
But they turned us loose. So we couldn't be useful except maybe for
amusement--but that doesn't jell. No. They've done something to us.
They've let us go for a reason."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Stop analyzing!" Edith said. "Why don't you just get scared, like I
am!"
"I _am_," he said, "but I like to figure things out. If I know what
frightens me, it doesn't bother me so much."
"Do that while we're on the way home. Get your clothes on and let's get
out of here! Right away!"
"We have to pack."
"Oh, leave it! Let's get out while we can!"
"I don't think we're in any danger," he said.
"Well--I don't want to stay here a minute longer!"
"All right. We'll go. But we'll pack first. Look at it logically. They
had us cold. We didn't escape. We were _let_ go. So why, if they didn't
want us then, should they want us now?"
"Unless they can get us any time they want us."
"You have a point there, but if that's the case, they can get us
anyway. So let's pack."
"You can pack if you want to. I'm leaving!" Edith pulled the opening to
the tent and slipped out.
"Edith!" Donald cried. "Wait!"
I touched Ven. "Stop her," I said.
Edith's voice came from outside. "Don!" she called in a tight voice.
"Don! Help me! _I can't move!_"
"Try coming back here and see what happens," Donald said slowly.
Edith's head appeared in the entrance. "I'm back," she said in a small
voice.
"I thought you would be. Now let's pack and perhaps they'll let us go.
It's obvious that we can't run away."
"But why? _What's happened to us?_"
"If I told you, you'd think I'm crazy."
"Tell me anyway. It can't be any worse than this."
"I think," Donald said slowly as he began to roll up his sleeping bag,
"that we were kidnapped by extraterrestrials."
"Martians?"
"Not necessarily," he said. "But if I remember my nightmare correctly,
they aren't human--and they are obviously smart. So they aren't of this
earth. We don't have intelligent reptiles here. And with their ability
to control our actions, I'd say that they were from a considerably
higher culture than ours. They've done things to us--but I don't think
they did them just for fun. They want us to do something."
"What?"
"I don't know. Right now I'd guess they want us to pack our things.
Let's do it and get out of here. This place smells like the reptile
house in the zoo!"
  *  *  *  *  *
I was amazed. The native's analysis was as logical as my own would have
been under similar circumstances. There was nothing wrong with his mind
or with his courage. That big braincase held a smoothly functioning
mind and a cold courage I could almost envy. In a similar fix I wasn't
sure that I could be so calm.
My respect for him mounted. If there were others like him on this
world, his race could be a potential danger spot for the whole Galaxy.
And, with the natural antipathy between our races, these creatures
could be _trouble_ if they ever reached space. I wondered for a moment
if Authority had known this when It brought me here. There must be some
design that I should land here when this race was still capable of
being frustrated.
For the sake of civilization I would have to learn more about these
mammals. Much more. But since the male had deduced so much, there was
only one logical course of action. I adjusted the filters on my helmet
to allow the passage of surface thoughts, twisted the dials on the
controller until the meters balanced and projected gently.
"Donald--listen to me," I said.
He stiffened. "I thought you would be somewhere around," he said. "Who
are you?"
"My name is Eu Kor, and I am a native of Thalassa."
"Where's that?"
"A good many spatial units from here--a good many of your light years,"
I amended. "I mean you no harm, but I need your cooperation. My
spaceship is crippled. Our fuel has deteriorated. We need more and I
want you to get it for us. We captured you because we need your help.
Being a native you would not make a ripple in this society. And we
would create whirlpools."
"What is this material you want?"
"A metal. Atomic number 50, a white metal used as an alloy component
of primitive metallic cultures," I said. "It shouldn't be too hard to
get." I didn't realize how hard it was to describe what I wanted. I
wasn't getting through, and it bothered me. The culture barrier was
almost as bad as though we couldn't contact mind to mind.
"I think you mean tin," he said. I grasped the concept and it seemed
right.
"Bring me some and I will run tests," I said.
"And what do I get in return?"
  *  *  *  *  *
I thought quickly. If he wanted to bargain perhaps we could reach an
agreement. It's always better to have a cooperative proxy. They don't
cause nearly the trouble in management. And I had other things to do
than monitor natives. There was a great deal of repair work to be done
on the ship before she would fly again. The subspace radio power bank
had to be rebuilt and the circuits should be checked.
"I can give you knowledge that you wouldn't have for decades--maybe
centuries," I said. "And I can adjust your bodies for a longer and
happier life." I shot a glance at Ven still immersed in her helmet.
"In fact, I have made a few adjustments already."
"So I noticed," Donald thought dryly. "Although whether they're an
improvement or not I couldn't say. But did you have to go to all this
trouble?"
"Think of us--and discount the fact that you carried us because our
bodies are too weak for your heavy world." I said. "Did you like us?"
"No," he said. "You repelled me. I disliked you on sight, more than I
can say."
"The emotion is mutual," I said. "Yet I can endure you. But with your
glandular outlook you could only think of destroying us."
"That is true. But you treated us like animals."
"You are animals," I said logically.
"We are masters of this world. We recognize no higher authority. We are
free people--not slaves. And unless we are treated as free agents you
will get no cooperation from us."
"I can force you to do as I wish," I said.
"Prove it!"
I took over. And while Donald watched with helpless horror his hand
picked up a knife and drew it across his arm. The keen edge split the
tissues neatly and the blood flowed.
"Don! What are you doing!" Edith screamed and then stiffened as Ven
took control.
"Observe," I said as I released control.
"Why, you--" Donald began--and then continued in a tone of wonder.
"Why--the cut's closing! There's no more blood--It's gone!"
"It's just one of the improvements I mentioned," I said smugly. "You
also had a patch of scar tissue on your left lung and infected kidneys.
You do not have them now. Had you not met us you would have been dead
within five of your years."
  *  *  *  *  *
He was shaken. I could feel it. "I do have Bright's disease," he said
thoughtfully.
"You had it," I corrected.
"All right," he said suddenly, "I'll bargain with you. You've done me a
good turn and it deserves a payment. I'll help you get your metal." He
grinned ruefully. "I guess I couldn't do anything else."
"It makes it easier this way," I said. I smiled to myself. I was
telling him the truth, but not all of it. Nor did I trust him. There
was fear and hatred in his lower centers, and a formless feeling in his
upper levels that he could outsmart any damn lizard that ever lived. He
didn't realize that I could read his surface thoughts.
"Just remember," I said, "I can control you completely, if necessary,
and pick your brain for data whether you wish it or not. And forget
those ideas of informing your authorities about us. Except with your
mate you cannot communicate to anyone about us. There's a basic block
in your brain that will result in irreversible mental damage if you
try."
This last was not quite the truth. But I hoped that by establishing
fear I would prevent talk. "Now find us samples of the metal I want." I
withdrew and went back to scanning.
"What was going on there?" Edith said. "You were talking to empty air.
And why did you cut yourself?"
"It was one of our reptilian friends," Don said. "Like I thought,
they're right with us--every way. He's a weird sort. Wants to trade
health and knowledge for tin."
"Tin?"
"Yeah. At least I think it's tin. His description of the metal fits.
They use it instead of rocket juice."
"But that knife--your arm?"
"Look. No cut--no blood. That's one of the things they did to us. We've
got puncture-proof skin."
"Is that good?"
"It isn't bad. And I don't think I'll ever have to shave again. As I
remember I put that stuff on my face. Anyway, we now have a couple
of fairy godmothers who ride around in spaceships instead of pumpkin
coaches."
"You're mixing your stories," Edith said. "Cinderella travelled in the
pumpkin coach, not her fairy godmother. And besides, it's not funny.
We're more like those poor souls in the Middle Ages who were possessed
by devils--incubuses, I think they called them."
"It makes no difference what you call them," Donald said indifferently.
"Whatever they are, we've got them and they're not going to leave until
they're damn good and ready. Incidentally, yours is a female, so she's
probably a succubus. Now don't start screaming. You'll probably be
paralyzed if you do."
"I won't scream," Edith said dully. "I'm too numb to scream."
IV
We had surprisingly little trouble with the two natives once they
realized we could control them if we wished. Of the two, Edith was the
worst. She refused to cooperate and had to be forced into the simplest
actions.
"We're going to have trouble with that one," I observed as Ven looked
at me with faint exasperation in her yellow eyes.
"Oh, I don't think so," she said. "Not really. This is a normal female
reaction. It's a phase. Like the way I felt when the Eugenics Council
selected me to be your mate."
"Did you feel like that?" I asked with surprise.
"Of course. I wanted to make my own choice."
"But you never told me."
"There was no need. I came around to the Council's view before I met
you. And Edith will come around to mine. Don't worry. I know how to
handle this."
And she did.
I helped a little by altering a few reflex arcs and basic attitudes,
but Ven wouldn't allow me to modify the higher centers.
"There's no need to make her a mindless idiot," Ven said. "You didn't
do that to Donald."
"Yes, but Donald controls his emotions. He doesn't like me any better
than Edith likes you, but he doesn't work himself into an emotional
homogenate every time I make a suggestion. We argue it out like
rational intelligences. Often I can use his experience and viewpoint.
And when I can't agree, he will cooperate rather than operate under
control. He's not like that bundle of glands and emotions you are
trying to make into a useful proxy."
"She _is_ a problem," Ven admitted, "but if I had her here--"
"That can be arranged," I said. "I'll give you two weeks. And if that
doesn't work you let me perform a prefrontal block."
"That isn't very long."
"That's all we can afford, I told her.
"All right, I can try. In a month I know I could do it."
Donald protested violently when I told him what we planned for Edith,
but when I gave him the alternative, he reluctantly agreed.
He passed a story that Edith would be visiting friends, and brought her
to the ship.
At once Ven went systematically to work to reduce the mammal to an
acquiescent state that would permit control. Since sleep is unknown
to our race but necessary for mammals, the task of breaking down the
female's resistance was simplified by physical exhaustion. Ven also
found that the mammal's sleeping time could be used to strengthen the
new reflex channels built during her waking periods. The results were
amazing, even to me, and I'm fairly well trained in neuromanipulation.
Halfway through the second week the mammal's surrender was complete.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Another day and she can go back," Ven said. "I can finish her training
at long range. Now that I have the channels established, I don't think
she'll be any further trouble."
I took the helmet and scanned Edith. "Hmm," I said. "Do you know what
you've done? You've built yourself into an Authority image."
"I know," Ven said smugly. "She is essentially a dependent type. Her
mate was her decision maker. That's why I had to get her alone. It
wasn't too hard once I knew where to look. As a girl, her mother made
the decisions for her. As a woman, Donald has done it. And when I faced
her with situations where she had to decide and where the decisions
were invariably wrong, she transferred the decision-making power to me."
I looked at her sharply. "I had no idea that you intended to make a pet
out of her," I said. "Otherwise I wouldn't have permitted this."
"Well, it's too late now. And besides, it was the only way I could do
it in the time you allotted. But don't worry. She'll be as good a tool
as your precious Donald--maybe even a better one--because she'll do
things to please me and not merely because they're expedient."
Ven had a point there. But it isn't a good policy to get emotionally
involved with alien races. However, the deed was done, and as long as
Ven was happy I didn't care. I only hoped that she wouldn't become too
attached to the creature.
Donald was much more cooperative and much tougher. He had realized from
the start that there was no profit in objecting to my demands. But,
unlike Edith, he gave me no handle for leverage. He arranged his life
to include the unpleasant fact of my existence, and that was that.
Where Ven achieved a form of mastery, I never received anything more
than acquiescence. There were levels in Donald I could not touch. At
first it irked me, but then I realized that I was the greater gainer.
For Donald was a constant challenge, a delight to the mind, an outward
collaborator and an inward enemy. Our relationship had all the elements
of an armed truce. And I often thought that if I did not have the
crushing advantage of control, our contest might have been more even.
Although in time Donald's hatred became modified to a grim sort of
tolerance, and his repulsion into something that closely resembled
admiration, he never lost the basic species antipathy which separated
us. And in that regard our feelings were mutual. The ancient Thalassan
proverb that familiarity breeds friendship simply didn't apply. We held
a mutual respect for each other, and in a fashion we cooperated, but I
never could pierce the armor of resentment that shielded him. I tried,
but finally I gave up. There would never be friendship between us. We,
were too different--
And too alike.
  *  *  *  *  *
In the days that followed the first contact, I proceeded according
to approved methods of investigating alien civilizations. At my
request, Donald went to the local book repository and we went through
a number of works on law, government, social structure, and finance.
I felt that I should have some knowledge of this mammalian culture
before attempting to refuel the ship. There was no sense in calling
attention to myself any more than necessary. If I could obtain what I
wanted and leave quietly, I would be perfectly happy. This world was
of interest--but it was too disturbing to contemplate for an extended
period of time.
"You were right, Eu Kor," Ven said to me as we scanned the pattern of
the mammals' culture. "If you had picked any place less isolated than
this, we might have been engulfed in that maelstrom."
I nodded. "It was more luck than design," I said, "but I am happy that
we are no closer. This world is not for us. It is too strange, too
alien with its uncontrolled emotionalism and frightening energy."
"It reminds me of a malignant neoplasm," Ven said, "growing
uncontrolled, destroying the body from which it draws sustenance.
Have you ever seen such a seething flux of people--such growth--such
appalling waste and carelessness?"
I shook my head. "The only parallel that comes to mind is Sennor."
"But that's a dead world--killed by a suicidal race that achieved
technology before it had attained culture."
"Which is precisely the situation we have here. Or have you observed
their social inequities and history? Periodically these mammals erupt
in merciless riots and slaughters over things that could be settled by
reason. And oddly enough, these 'wars' as humans call them have the
effect of stimulating technology. This is a race that apparently loves
death and battle. A barbaric horde of cultural morons, with a civilized
technology geared to mutual destruction."
"Frankly, I've been scanning through Edith. I've seen only the
technical excellence of their entertainment industry, and the enormous
waste which goes into the making of one of their productions."
"We must have a synthesis," I said, "and pool our observations."
Ven nodded.
"I'm not at all happy about this place," I continued. "It makes me
uncomfortable."
"Could we modify it?" Ven asked.
I shook my head. "It would take an entire task force to do that.
Reeducation of this culture would have to begin at birth after
appropriate culling. We would have to start from the beginning. I fear
that the council would never authorize such an action on behalf of
mammals. We are altruistic ... but not that altruistic."
"Then they will destroy themselves?"
"I fear so. This culture has a poor prognosis. But it is perhaps better
so. Or would you like to see them roaming through the Galaxy?"
Ven shuddered. "Not as they are now. Not these fierce, combative stupid
brutes. Individuals perhaps, but not the race. They would have to learn
the rules of civilization first."
"Yet they show no sign of learning. If they can't even cooperate with
their own species, how in Authority's name could they ever get along
with the dissimilar races of this island universe?"
"They couldn't. We would have to quarantine them."
"So isn't it better to save the expense and let them quarantine
themselves?"
"I suppose so." Ven's aura was a dull gray and mine matched the gloom
of hers. It is hard to stand aloof and watch a race condemn itself to
death.
  *  *  *  *  *
We fed our observations into the analyzer, together with all extraneous
data we could lay our digits on via our proxies--not to prove our
conclusions but to determine the means by which we could obtain the
power metal with the least possible repercussions in this society. We
both realized it would be fatal to expose ourselves. The mammalian
technology was sufficiently advanced for them to duplicate the
essential portions of our ship, and chaos could result if they secured
a road to the stars. Generations of effort would be required to confine
them again to their homeworld.
Thinking in this manner caused me to take certain precautions with the
drive mechanism that would ensure no trace of our craft remaining if I
projected a certain impulse at a given strength. Ven, of course, was
appalled at my action, although she realized its grim necessity.
And in the meantime we worked with our proxies, I attempting to
establish some means of quietly obtaining the metal we needed, and
Ven doing nothing so far as I could determine that would further our
mission. At that, Edith was in no position to obtain metal, and Ven was
too young and inexperienced in contact work to attempt a mission of
such delicacy. Since Edith amused her, I was content to leave them both
to their own devices while I worked with Donald to speed our departure.
"In this society," I said to Donald, "it seems that one can accomplish
anything with this medium of exchange you call money."
"That's close to a fundamental truth," Donald replied.
"And you are not too well supplied with it?" I asked.
"Those four ingots I brought you last week put a vicious dent in our
savings account."
"Isn't your trade as an author profitable?"
"Only in spurts. It's a feast-famine existence. But it's the only one I
care to lead."
"But popular fiction makes money--and you can write."
"I wish you'd tell that to my agent. He seems to have other ideas."
"I have recently read some of your fiction," I said, "and have noticed
that it has certain basics that could easily be applied to an analyzer.
There is no reason why we could not cooperate and produce a work that
would yield a great deal of money."
Donald laughed. "Now I've heard everything!" he said. "You mean to tell
me _you_ could write a book _humans_ would buy?"
"No, you would write the book. I would merely furnish the idea, the
research data, the plot, and the general story outline. In your popular
fiction," I continued, "there are four basic elements and a plot
that can be varied about twenty-five ways. There is small need for
philosophy and little need for abstract thought. In fact, there is no
need at all for anything but glandular excitation. All that is really
necessary is plenty of action, enough understanding of the locale and
events to avoid anachronism--and the basics."
  *  *  *  *  *
"What are these basics?" Donald said. "As a writer I'd like to know
them."
"There are four," I ticked them off on my digits. "First, violation
of the ethical or moral code of your race; second, adequate amounts
of cohabitation between the characters; third, brutality; and
fourth--murderous assault."
"Hmm. Sin, sex, sadism and slaughter," Donald commented. "You know, you
might have something there."
"I have prepared an outline and a synopsis of such a book," I said. "It
is a historical novel. It should sell. Most historical novels do."
"You've done what?" Donald gasped. Then he laughed. "Of all the
insufferable egoists I've ever seen!"
"Listen," I said, ordering him to silence while I outlined the opening
chapter.
"I can't stop you," Donald said. "But why should this happen to me?
Isn't it bad enough to be bossed around by you lizards without having
to be forced to ghost-write your amateur literary efforts?"
"It is laid in the period of your history called the Renaissance," I
continued, "and deals with a young man of a noble but impoverished
house who rose to power by cleverness, amorality and skill with the
sword."
"I suppose the girl is the daughter of the local duke."
"No," I said, "she is the favorite wife of a Saracen corsair."
"Well, that's a switch," Donald said. "Tell me more."
So I did. I outlined the opening and told him the major points of
the whole story ... as the computer had synthesized it out of seven
excellent novels of the period and a four-volume set of Renaissance
history.
Donald was enthralled. "You're right," he said. "It will sell. It's
lousy literature, but it's got appeal. With this story and my writing
we can out-Spillane Mickey." He was more enthusiastic than I had ever
seen him appear before.
"Who is Spillane?" I asked.
Donald looked at me as though he thought I was crazy and shook his
head. "I can get to work on it as soon as I get home," Donald said.
"And if I keep at it, it'll be ready for mailing in a couple of weeks.
I'll get it off to my agent and we'll see. I hate to admit it, but I
think you're right about the yarn. It should sell like hotcakes."
"That is fine. It should provide us with the medium of exchange, which
is necessary in this society."
"It's not necessary," Donald grinned. "It's essential."
V
Donald's prediction was a good one. The book sold--and sold well.
Despite the outright plagiarism of ideas and source material it was
hailed as a new novel--one that stimulated thought with its realistic
approach to the life of the times. And we prospered amazingly.
With the advance money, I had Donald buy the land on which the ship
was resting, together with the valley and rimrock. Having thus secured
our landing site I felt a bit more comfortable. The comfort was even
greater when, at Donald's suggestion, a fence was placed around the
property and electronic tell-tales were installed. The remainder of the
royalties were used to purchase tin and supplies.
But despite our prosperity and the regular supply of tin that came to
me as a result of my adventure in fiction, and the certainty that Ven
and I would be leaving, Donald was not happy.
As a successful new author he had to travel to meetings in various
cities. He had to speak at public gatherings. He had to meet with
publishers eager to receive rights to his next book. And Edith did not
go with him.
Ven was adamant on this point. "It's bad enough that she is working
on this motion picture," she said, "but I'm not going to have her
traveling all over the face of this planet. She's the only amusement I
have since we must stay cooped up in this place. I'm not going to let
her go."
Donald was upset about it. He was so angry that he came to visit me
voluntarily, and the sight of Edith's little car parked under the trees
below the ship infuriated him even more. It took the controller to make
him keep his distance as he stood in front of the airlock and hated me.
"Damn you!" he swore. "You can't do this to me! Edith's my wife and I
don't like this relationship between her and that--that _dinosaur_! It
isn't healthy."
"It's out of my hands," I said. "Edith is Ven's responsibility."
"It's not only that," he raged. "Ever since you lizards butted into our
lives Edith looks at me like I was a stranger." His face twisted. "I'll
admit she has her reasons. But that gives her no call to ask Ven's
advice rather than mine. When I told her I wanted her to come with me,
the first thing she said was that she'd ask Ven. She doesn't do one
damn thing without that cold-blooded little monster's consent! She even
asks advice on what clothes she should wear!" He laughed harshly. "The
blind asking advice from the blind!"
  *  *  *  *  *
I couldn't help chuckling. Ven, like all Thalassans, had never worn
anything in her life except a utility belt. Clothing has never been a
feature of our culture. Since it isn't necessary on Thalassa, it was
never developed, and since our sex impulses are periodic it has never
been useful to attract either males or females. "I can see your point,"
I said. "Ven's ideas along that line would be zero."
"Not quite," Donald said angrily. "She likes moccasins. Apparently they
make feet look more like your pads."
"Well?"
"But that's it! Edith's idea of what a well-dressed housewife should
wear is--_moccasins_! She damn near caused a riot the other day when
our TV repairman called to fix the set. We'll be lucky if we're not
forced to move because of that little incident!"
"I'll speak to Ven," I said. "And if that doesn't work, I'll insert
a block against such a thing happening again. I don't want special
attention called to you. That sort of thing will stop right now."
"Thanks," Donald said. "But I should be the one to stop it."
"Face it," I replied, "you aren't. Not now. But you will be once we're
gone."
"Which can't be too soon to suit me," he said. "I spend every spare
moment collecting tin for you. Edie doesn't. She _wants_ Ven to stay."
"They seem to be happy with each other. Edith comes up here regularly."
"I know," he said bitterly. "She's here more often than she's home. I
can't see what fun she gets out of running around these hills stripped
to the skin carrying your mate on her shoulders."
"I wouldn't know," I said. "Certainly you never seem to enjoy
performing that service for me."
"I don't even like the thought of it. I'm not an animal, after all."
"But you are," I said. "So am I. The only difference is that I am a
superior animal and you, being inferior, conform to my wishes. It is a
law of nature that the superior type will inevitably rule. The inferior
either conforms or dies. And you have no desire to die."
He shook his head. "But I can still object," he said.
"At that?" I asked pointing across the meadow with a primary digit.
Edith was running, her long yellow hair floating free behind her.
Ven, high on her shoulders in a seat the two of them had contrived,
waved gaily at us as they came up. Edith was flushed and laughing. Her
eyes sparkled and her smooth bronze body gleamed in the sunlight. She
lowered Ven to the ground, slipped the harness off her smooth shoulders
and stood behind my mate, breathing deeply but not at all distressed.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Oh, Donald!" she said. "We had a wonderful climb--clear up to the top
of the ridge! And coming down was almost like flying! I'll tell you all
about it in a minute, right after I take a dip in the pool. Ven doesn't
like it when I sweat." She turned and ran down to the little pool in
the meadow.
"See what I mean!" Donald gritted.
"She seems happy. She's not hurt. And Ven's little weight doesn't seem
to bother her. What are you complaining about?"
Donald growled something unintelligible, turned on his heel and walked
away.
I let him go. There was no sense in making him angrier than he was.
After a moment the snarl of his car's engine rose to a crescendo then
faded away into the distance.
A few minutes later Edith came back to the ship. "Why did Don leave?"
she asked.
"Perhaps he had something to do," Ven said.
She pouted. "He's always so busy nowadays," she said sulkily. "He isn't
nice like he used to be. Do you think he's tired of me?"
"No, I don't think so. He just doesn't like you spending so much time
up here," I said.
"But it's fun--and Ven likes it," she said. "I like it too. And since
he isn't home much any more, it's the only place where I can relax and
be myself." She brushed the drops of water from her body and shook out
her damp hair. "It's wonderful up here--so quiet and peaceful--and
Ven's so nice."
My mate's aura glowed a pleased pink as I turned an embarrassed
lavender. It was almost criminal, I thought, what Ven had done to
the girl. Donald might be my servant, but I had never attempted to
condition him into liking it. As much as possible we operated as
equals, rather than in this sickening relationship which Ven had
imposed upon Edith. To avoid showing my displeasure I went up to the
control room, donned my helmet and went into rapport with Donald.
"I'm sorry," I said. "I hadn't realized the true situation. The best
thing for both of us is for Ven and me to leave as quickly as possible."
"How quick is that?" he shot back angrily.
"Four thousand pounds more," I said.
"Whew! That can must drink tin."
"It takes a great deal to leave a planet," I said. "And hyperspace
demands a great deal more. Once we develop an inertialess drive it will
be easier. But we've only been working on it a thousand years. These
things take time."
"I imagine. Well, are you going to do anything about Edith?"
"No," I said. "It would only make things worse. The relationship has
gone too far. Ven has become an Authority-image."
"You could break it."
"But I won't. I'm fond of Ven."
"You're a damned little tyrant," Donald said. "You like to see a human
squirm."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Be thankful that I'm the worst tyrant you'll see," I answered sharply.
"You could really learn about them if the Slaads knew you existed.
They're more advanced than you. And, unlike us, they're warlike and
predatory. They breed mammals for food. However, I'll put up a marker
on your moon before I leave. They respect Thalassa and won't preempt
our claims."
"You mean you're going to lay claim to Earth?"
"Only technically. We'll exercise it only if the Governing Council
decides it will be to our advantage."
"What would you do if you took over?" Don asked curiously.
"Clean things up," I said. "Stop wars, stabilize the population,
increase production and distribution, give you an effective central
government and an understandable legal code, and eliminate the unfit.
In three generations you'd be Class VI all over your planet."
"It sounds good. What's the catch."
"The catch," I said, "is that you wouldn't like it. You mammals are
erratic, emotional and uncontrolled. You do not reason well, and you
have no race discipline."
"What's that?"
"The capability of sacrificing units for the benefit of the whole.
Eugenics control, culling the unfit."
"You're talking about human beings!" Donald exploded.
"And what makes a human being different from any other animal?" I
asked. "Would you hesitate to dispose of an animal that was unfit to
breed?"
He sighed. "No," he said. "But that's not the same."
"What's the difference? And realize, it's done for your betterment."
"Just a bunch of murderous little altruists," Donald sneered. "Out of
the kindness of your cold-blooded hearts--"
"That's the trouble with you lower orders," I interrupted. "You get
emotional. Your observations have no basis in logic. Actually, the
Galaxy wouldn't even quiver if the lot of you disappeared tomorrow. Yet
you think the universe rotates about your heads."
"I didn't--"
"Don't interrupt," I snapped. "You--your race--your whole pitiful
little civilization is ready mentally and almost ready technologically
to commit suicide. If we came and saved you, you would owe us eternal
gratitude, but I doubt if we'd get it."
"You wouldn't," Donald assured me. "There wouldn't be a human alive who
wouldn't hate you."
"I realize that--and that is one of the reasons I should report your
world unfavorably to the council. We could hardly take on an altruism
mission like this unless we felt that our work would be appreciated. It
would be better to let you kill yourselves."
"Altruism!"
"In a sense. At least your race would be the greater gainers. All we'd
get would be your excess population."
"And what would you want them for--slaves?"
"Authority, no!" I said, shocked in spite of myself. "We'd merely
process them for food."
He was silent after that.
  *  *  *  *  *
Donald was away again, at a publisher's meeting. Our new book laid
in Restoration England was going to be an even greater success than
the first if the advance notices were any criterion. Edith was at a
studio party celebrating the completion of the picture in which she was
working. And Ven was bored.
For awhile she sat in on Donald's conference in a city called New York,
but that proved to be uninteresting. I was busy with a faulty fuel feed
in the drive chamber. The sun was hot, and the day was promising to be
extremely warm even though it was not yet noon. It was one of those
days when nothing happens, and I was grateful for it. I had had enough
of emotional tangles to last me for some time. It was almost soothing
to work with the robots on insensate machinery rather than supervise a
pair of highly charged mammals and a hardly less unstable mate.
The association with these entities hadn't done Ven a great deal
of good. In fact, I could notice a deterioration of her character
that bothered me. She no longer looked at me with respect. Indeed,
her yellow eyes at times held a pitying amusement that I should be
so weak as to argue with Donald. I didn't bother to point out that
the three tons of power metal had virtually all been brought aboard
through Donald's efforts, and that our conveniences, our defenses, our
robots and our very lives were due to the working arrangements I had
established.
The only useful thing Edith had done in the past month was to help me
change the tube liners in the steering jets. Her size and strength had
made the job easy--and it was normally a hard one, since the robots
didn't have the flexibility or balance that Edith, with her dancer's
body, possessed. The job had taken two days. It would have taken better
than a week if I had to use robots.
The mammals, I thought, would be of distinct value as members of
spaceport maintenance crews. Their combination of immense strength
and high intelligence would be useful to our society. I made a note
of it and added it to the data I was assembling for the Council. It
was foolish, perhaps, but I couldn't help feeling an interest in these
creatures.
I looked across the little valley that was our domain. It was an
idyllic life we were leading. Unhurried--peaceful--the sort of life I
thoroughly enjoyed. It would have been perfect if it wasn't for the
insane and dangerous world on which it was being lived.
Of course it was too good to last. Idylls invariably are. The peace
of ours was shattered abruptly when Ven came into the drive room and
disturbed my work. Her aura blazed a rich violet.
"Eu," she said. "Come up to the control room. Something's wrong!"
"What," I asked.
"It's Edith. I can't do a thing with her."
"You're not supposed to. She's working now."
"She is not! Her studio has finished the picture and they're having a
party."
"That's nice. I hope you're letting her have a good time."
"I told her to. But I never imagined what they'd be doing!" Ven's voice
was anguished.
"Well, what _are_ they doing?"
"Ingesting ethanol to excess!"
"Ethanol!" I gasped. "Oh no!"
I hadn't realized that normal mammals consumed excess amounts of the
stuff, although there were references to it in the literature. I
thought that was merely literary exaggeration. After all, we had been
here scarcely half a year, and we hadn't really learned too much about
the details of mammalian society. Donald's kidneys had forced him to
lead a quiet life, and the passing of Edith from his control to Ven's
had caused no remarkable alterations in her doings.
I should have paid more attention to their customs. But I had been
too busy. I swore as I reached for my control helmet. I'd have to stop
this before it became serious. Donald would be of no help to me. He was
several thousand vursts away, and even under the best circumstances
couldn't be expected back for a day.
I didn't bother to call him, but instead adjusted the controls to
Edith's setting.
VI
A horde of gaily dressed mammals surrounded me, their faces and bodies
oddly fuzzy and distorted. Edith's voice was equally fuzzy. There was
something wrong with her centers. I tapped the helmet and checked the
controller just in case it was on our end, but they were functioning
perfectly. There was nothing wrong--merely the fact that ethanol was
disturbing the biocircuits I had implanted in her brain. I swore a
few choice expletives of Low Thalassan and tried to get through by
increasing the power. It did no good.
"I c'n still feel that li'l lizard in m' head," Edith announced. "Gimme
another drink. I wanna wash her out. Darn li'l lizard makes me do
things I dowanna do. It wants me to quit, but I wanna get drunk."
"Take it easy," a fuzzy male face said. "You're loaded. Why does a
nice chick like you hafta be loaded? Whyncha get outa here? I gotta
nice place over in Santa Monica where--"
The face disappeared.
"Hey! Alice! Golly, I almos' din't reckanize you. Howya doin?"
"Better than you, Edith. You're drunk. And from the looks of you,
you're going to be sick if you don't get some fresh air."
"Gotta go spit in the eye of my li'l lizard," Edith said. "Y'wanna
come with me? I got Don's car. We c'n get outa here an' get some fresh
air--an' I c'n tell that li'l lizard what I think of her."
"What are you talking about?"
"You wanna see my li'l lizard. She's got yella eyes, and a li'l tail,
and she turns all kindsa colors, and she lives in a rock with a door
in it, an she makes me do things I dowanna do. It ain't so bad though.
Mosta the time I like it. Not alla time though. That's why I wanna spit
in her eye. She c'n tell me all she wants--but she's gotta leave me'n
Don alone. I love that guy." Edith started sobbing--why, I couldn't
understand.
"She's maudlin," I said to Ven. "No one's going to believe a thing she
is saying. But this should be a warning to us. We'll have to put in
a block against drinking ethanol. I didn't realize how badly it can
affect the biocircuits." I handed the helmet back to Ven. "You can
watch this mess if you want to. I'm going to our quarters."
I slipped out of the control chair and walked across the room.
I was stronger now, more accustomed to the gravity, and it didn't
bother me unless I had to stand for long periods of time. I turned in
the doorway to look at Ven. She had the helmet on again and her aura
was a crackling red. I shook my head. Edith was due for a bad time when
the effects of that hydrocarbon wore off.
I had hardly fallen into light estivation when Ven's projection crashed
through my antennae.
"Eu! Get up! Come here quickly!"
With a groan I came slowly back to full facility and ran to the control
room. Ven's face was filled with panic.
"They're coming up here," she said. "A whole carful of them!"
"Who?"
"Edith's drunken friends! Somehow she's collected six of them and
they're driving up here to spit in my eye!"
Despite myself, I laughed. Ven looked so outraged I couldn't help it.
"We can close the airlock," I said, "and they can't tell us from a
rock."
"I won't! I'm going to teach that girl a lesson she won't forget in a
hurry! I've listened to myself being insulted for two hours--and she's
still going strong. When she gets up here I'll show her whose eye
she'll spit in!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Ven was raging. I'd never seen her so emotional before. Her aura
swelled and ebbed in ruddy shades as her breath came and went in short
gasps.
"And how do you propose to do that?" I asked.
"I'll stat her!" Ven raged. "I'll stat every one of them!"
I blinked. "I wouldn't do that," I said mildly. "What can we do with
them? The two we have are bad enough. And if you stat them, we'll have
to kill or condition them. We couldn't let them go home with a story
like the one they'd tell."
"I don't care," Ven said. "You can do what you like about the rest
of them, but that Edith is going to learn a lesson." She was being
emotional and quite unwilling to listen to reason--and she was larger
and stronger than I. Despite my protests, she jerked a stat projector
from the rack and strode toward the open airlock.
"Thalassa!" she exclaimed. "They're coming through the gate! They'll be
here in a minute."
I could hear the roar of a protesting engine groaning up the trail to
the lower meadow as I hurried after Ven. As I reached the airlock, the
gray body of Donald's station wagon poked its nose around the trees
below our ship.
Ven stood rigidly in the airlock, waiting, her lips tight and her eyes
narrow. She took a firmer grip on the stat as the car stopped and the
giggling, half-sober humans tumbled out. I was in a quandary. I didn't
want Ven to shoot, but I couldn't close the airlock with her inside it.
So I stood, hesitating while the group of gaily dressed mammals came
toward us through the trees, their high voices loud in the stillness.
"Gotta find that li'l lizard an tell her to stop meddling with my
life," Edith's voice came to my ears.
Ven stiffened beside me as the group broke out of the trees in front of
the ship.
"Why, Edie, it's beautiful!" a voice said. "It's a fairy glen! No
wonder you'd never tell us where you got that suntan! And that big
rock--it's just like you said--And--uh!" The voice never finished as
Ven pressed the trigger.
I looked down at the six crumpled mammalian bodies and the lone
standing figure that looked stupidly up at us.
"Well," I said. "You've done it this time. Now are you satisfied?
"No," Ven said. "Not half." Her voice was tight with anger. She looked
down at Edith. "Come here!" she said.
"Dowanna," Edith replied uncertainly. "You've made Don leave me. I
don't like you." But habit was stronger than alcohol and under the
furious lash of Ven's voice she came unsteadily forward.
"Do you understand me, you little sarf!" Ven snapped icily. "I said
_come here_!" She took the control box from her waist and viciously
twisted the intensity dial to maximum. At this range its force was
irresistible, even with alcohol-deadened synapses. Edith shuddered and
moved toward us, her hands clumsily tearing at the fabric that covered
her.
"I'm comin'! You don' hafta shout. I ain't deaf. I ain't done nothin'!"
She sat down beside the airlock and struggled out of her clothing,
ripping the thin fabric under the last of Ven's anger until she was
completely naked. Then she stood up and reached her hands toward Ven.
"You're not going to try to ride her while she's in that condition?" I
said.
"This is my affair," Ven replied grimly. "I'm going to get this
settled."
I shrugged.
  *  *  *  *  *
There was no sense reasoning with her while she was in that mood. And
if she wanted to kill herself that was her concern. I watched her drop
onto Edith's shoulders, wind one hand viciously into the mammal's long
blonde hair and guide the gross body into a shambling walk toward the
meadow. Edith swayed dangerously, but somehow she managed to stay on
her feet as they disappeared into the trees.
I walked over to the six bodies, gave each of them a light stat to make
sure they would remain quiet and sat down beside the nearest one to
think.
Ven's anger had left me a sizeable problem. What on earth could I do
with six human females? I needed them like I needed a broken digit.
Time passed and the sun rose toward the zenith, and finally I came to a
decision. Since we had them on our hands, we might as well make use of
them. Killing would be too dangerous.
And presently Edith came through the trees, a sick, tired, sober Edith
whose face was dirty and tear streaked, carrying a grim Ven whose aura
smoldered a reddish brown.
"What did you do to her?" I asked.
"None of your business," Ven snapped. "She's all right now. Aren't you,
Edith?"
"Yes, Ven--and I won't do it again. Honest I won't."
"You'd better not," Ven said grimly. "Now I suppose we have some work
to do."
"You certainly have," I said. "If it wasn't for your temper we wouldn't
have this mess on our hands. Now get moving! Have Edith carry these
girls to the ship." I gestured at the prone bodies. "And you, get
inside and bring out the control equipment and connect the leads to the
computer." I was angry, too. Under the force of my superior will, the
two females scurried to obey. "I'm disgusted with you, Ven," I said
angrily. "Just because your pet went to a party, you don't have to act
childish. Did you expect she'd behave like a Thalassan?"
"I trusted her," Ven said.
"It just goes to show that you can't trust an animal too far," I said.
"Now get moving. Bring the probes first. We have a lot of work to do
before evening."
  *  *  *  *  *
It was finished sooner than I expected. The sun was still in the
sky, but close to the edge of the hills. The row of mammalian bodies
slumbered peacefully beside the airlock. Ven looked down at them
speculatively.
"No," I said. "You have one, and that's enough."
"But," Ven said.
"I've humored you," I said. "I've let you act like a lower order. Now
I want to see you behave like a civilized being. For unless you do, I
shall have to take steps. I'm tired of this childishness."
"I'll be all right now," Ven replied. "We've come to an understanding."
She gestured at Edith with her primary digit and the big mammal
shivered. I wondered what Ven had done to her. Edith was thoroughly
cowed--actually afraid of little Ven, who was less than one fifth her
size. In a way, I felt an odd sort of pride in my mate that she should
achieve mastery over such an intelligent and potentially dangerous
brute. I knew perfectly well that I'd never dare attempt such dominance
over Donald unless I was prepared to rob him of the mentality that made
him useful. But I consoled myself with the thought that this female was
peculiarly susceptible to domination.
"We'd better get that car out of sight," Ven said. She nodded to Edith.
The human obediently trotted off in the direction of the car. A few
moments later the sound of the motor rose and fell as she concealed it
in the trees.
As soon as I could, I contacted Donald and told him what had happened.
Fortunately he was alone, so his exclamation of surprise and
consternation didn't arouse any suspicion.
"Ethanol, eh?" he said speculatively.
It was easy to follow the trend of his thoughts. "Don't get any ideas,"
I warned in my best TV villain manner. "I have Edith up here with me.
If you want to see her again, you'd better stay sober."
"I wouldn't think of crossing you," he assured me insincerely. "I'm too
close to being rid of you."
"Well--what do we do?" I asked. "You're the expert on this insane
society of yours."
"You've done it," he said. "I don't think it was smart of you, but
under the circumstances, I can't see how you could have done anything
else. I warned you about Ven and Edith," he added--rather gloatingly, I
thought. "Now you're in for it." His voice was almost gay.
"How?"
"Six women vanishing all at once is going to cause a stir even in Los
Angeles," he said.
"After an ethanol party?" I asked curiously. "Six dancers out of a
production that used a hundred? Your city will never miss them."
"But their families will."
Families! I hadn't thought of that. Mammals had strong family
ties--probably due to their method of reproduction. We Thalassans,
coming as we did from eggs, had none of this. The state incubators and
the creches were our only contact with parenthood. We had no families.
"Hmm," I said. "I hadn't thought of that."
"Well, you'd better start. I hope it gives you a headache."
"You get nastier every time I talk with you," I complained.
"I have my reasons," he said bitterly. "Now, if you're through with
me, little master, I think I'd like to get some sleep. In the meantime
you'd better get them back to their homes before they're missed."
"I can't," I confessed. "The controller isn't big enough to handle
eight of you--not as individuals."
Donald chuckled grimly. "That's your worry. Remember, unless you find
out which of them will be missed and act accordingly, you're going to
be very much in the public eye."
  *  *  *  *  *
I didn't feel too happy as I cut off, but Donald had given me an idea.
One by one I checked the new proxies. Of the six, two were living
together. They had the casual emotional involvement with males so
characteristic of this species, but they could remain here for several
days without causing comment. Of the remaining four, one had a
roommate and would be difficult to extract; another was living alone;
still another was mated and had an offspring, but she was not living
with her mate--a legal action having separated her much as it separates
incompatible Thalassans. The offspring, however, was living with her
when she wasn't working, a not unusual situation on this world, but one
which could have some complications unless she was returned to it very
shortly.
The last was living with her parents and was seriously involved
emotionally with a male. She was planning to be officially mated
in the near future, although it would be legal fiction rather than
fact since she was already nurturing a living embryo of some three
weeks development. I debated whether to remove it, a simple enough
manipulation, but decided against it. It would be interesting to
observe a mammalian reproduction. But to remove her from her family and
her unofficial mate was a task that might be difficult. I needed help.
I projected a call for Ven, phrasing it imperatively so she could have
no doubt about its urgency. Her answer was quick and clear.
"I'm coming," she said.
"Good. I need you. And bring Edith. We have a problem that will require
her talents."
"She'll be happy to cooperate." Ven's projection was cheerfully
confident.
"You did her no permanent damage, I hope."
"Not a bit. In fact, you'd never know she's been disciplined."
"Well, get in here, both of you. We have work to do."
Edith had trouble squeezing into the control room and, despite her skin
conditioning, the place quickly filled with her scent. But Ven and
I were old hands now and took it in stride. She grasped the problem
instantly. "The only one who might be any trouble is Alice. Her family
and her boy friend can be difficult. The others won't need much effort,
except for Grace. She'd better be returned to her baby as soon as
possible."
"How soon?" I asked.
"The baby isn't living with her," Edith added, "not while she's
working, but she sees it regularly. Every day or two, I believe."
I sighed. That solved the biggest problem.
"We had better start at once," Ven said.
  *  *  *  *  *
I ignored her and looked inquiringly at Edith. "What would you do?" I
asked, flashing a cold projection at Ven to stay out of this.
"Well--if I had to do it, I'd send Alice and Grace home. I wouldn't do
anything to Alice except block her from talking about this place and
what happened. Grace I'd put under full control, have her pick up her
baby, go home and pack to leave. As soon as she's ready to go, bring
her out here."
"The infant, too?"
"Of course. A baby's no bother."
This, I thought, was something of an understatement.
"And what of the others?" I asked.
"Velma has a nosey roommate. Have her start a fight and leave angry.
She hasn't much baggage, and it won't be any trouble for her to
collect it. As for the other three, I think Joan's being kept. She
can't afford a single apartment on her salary. Loleta and Marian are
always out, sometimes for days. Their landlady won't think a thing of
it. If they never return, she'll just pack their things and rent the
room to someone else. I know that old witch. I'd just keep those three
here and not worry about them. Nobody's going to make any fuss about
three chorines disappearing. Later on you can make them write letters
enclosing money to send their clothes to another city. Then they can
be picked up and stored. That should give us a year before anyone gets
suspicious enough to look for them."
"Edith," I said, "you're a genius."
"I got you into this mess," Edith said. "So, perhaps I'd better get you
out."
"But your fellow mammals--"
"You haven't hurt me--not much, anyway," Edith said. "So I don't
suppose you'll hurt them. And, besides, I don't want Ven mad at me like
she was this afternoon. Anyway--you'll be gone soon."
"I think I shall regret leaving," I said honestly. "There is a great
deal about you mammals I am beginning to suspect I do not know."
"You aren't kidding," she said with faint bitterness so similar to
Donald's that my antennae quivered. "But it's been quite an experience.
I'll tell my kids when I have them--but they're not going to believe
me."
"I hope you have those children--and raise them to maturity," I said.
The tone of my voice caused her to look at me with sudden fear on her
face. But at the sight of my impassive features it died away. "You
scared me for a moment," she said.
"Did I? I didn't mean to."
VII
The next week kept us busy following Edith's instructions. I didn't see
how they would apply to Alice, but Edith knew her species better than
I. Alice's silence and the prying inquisitiveness of her parents and
her boyfriend worked like magic. Alice finally became angry and after
a stormy scene left the house, swearing never to return. Edith picked
her up as she walked away; Ven turned on the control and turned the
threat to fact. Later I took a leaf from Edith's book and sent Alice to
San Francisco, where I had her write a pair of bitter letters to her
parents and her extralegal mate. After that I felt more secure.
The others worked out exactly as Edith predicted. No trouble at all.
By the time Donald returned from the East with a ton of tin ingots in
a small truck our training schedule was well set up. The robots and I
had managed to build a multiplex controller similar to those we used
on Thalassa on the state farms, but much smaller. It could handle the
proxies en masse or as individuals. While far less sensitive than the
one in the ship, it was effective enough for our rather elementary
purposes.
Edith, who was running the group under Ven's supervision, had them
lined up in a row to greet Donald as he came up the hill toward the
ship.
"The place looks like a nudist colony," Donald grumbled. "You haven't
improved it any." He eyed the file of mammals trooping down to the
truck to unload the tin ingots. "I have another ton lined up for
delivery as soon as you get this processed," he said.
"Good," I replied. "We'll leave as soon as it's aboard. I don't like
the looks of your recent actions."
"Mine?" I shook my head. "Oh, you mean the world situation." I nodded.
"You shouldn't worry about it. You should have seen it this time last
year."
I shrugged. I would never really understand these creatures. Their
brains functioned differently. "You frighten me with your wild displays
of emotion. Someday one of you is going to start something and your
world is going to go up in fire."
"I don't think so," he said. "I have some ideas about that. With the
money from your stories and with what you have taught me, I think there
will be some changes." There was a peculiar expression in his eyes that
I couldn't identify. It made me vaguely uneasy. "I've been doing a lot
of thinking since you met up with Edie and me. What this world needs
is someone who can run it."
"That's obvious," I said. "Until your society catches up with your
technology you will be in constant danger. You mammals will have to
learn to discipline your emotions."
His face twisted. "I've had a good practical course in that," he said.
"Now I'm getting post-graduate training." He gestured at the women
coming up the hill carrying the silver tin ingots. "Just how long do
you think I can endure something like this?"
"Like what?" I asked.
"Do I have to draw you a diagram?" he asked. "Ever since you lizards
came into my life I haven't been able to touch a woman. Not even
Edith--and she's my wife. Just how much of this do you think I can
take?"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Oh!" I exclaimed with dawning comprehension. "I think I see."
The situation would have been amusing if it wasn't so stupid. I was
surprised that I hadn't realized it before. There was, I knew, a
certain amount of feedback in a bipolar control circuit. Obviously
enough of Ven's conditioning, and mine, had seeped through to affect
Donald and Edith's normal relationships. Mammals were far more
preoccupied with sex than we were. Their books, magazines, television
and motion pictures reeked of it. It was present in almost every piece
of advertising, and four of our six new proxies were living histories
of it. Yet Donald and Edith, because of our feedback, had been kept as
continent as novitiates for the priesthood of Authority!
"I'm a perfectly normal male," Donald said. "Just what do you think
you've been doing to me? I can't drink. I can't make love. I can't do
anything except collect tin for you lizards. Just why do you think I
hate you? Now you surround me with a whole damned untouchable harem!
Are you trying to drive me insane?"
I laughed, and Donald recognize the sound for what it was.
"Oh, _damn_ you!" he said bitterly. "How would you like to be married
for eight months and for six of them be unable to touch your wife? Just
why do you think Edith tried to get drunk? I could kill you cheerfully
for what you've done to us!"
"Oh!" I said. There was a world of understanding opening in front
of me. Of course, it would do no good to tell him that Ven and I
had remained in enforced continence for five years. It was just the
Eugenics council working through us--entirely involuntarily. What
was bothering Donald and Edith was so absurdly simple that neither
Ven nor I would have thought to ask. And the mammals with their
peculiar customs and habits would never have told us unless--as had
happened--the pressure became too great.
What our mammals needed was a good dose of Va Krul's basic therapy. If
Edith were fertilized as a result of it, so much the better. It would
keep her attention where it more properly belonged. The thought would
never have occurred to me in my present state. Since I was content, I
had erroneously assumed that everything was in harmony.
"You might as well go home," I said. "Take Edith with you. We won't
need you for several days."
"Why?"
"You'll find things a little different. I'll make a few adjustments on
the controller."
  *  *  *  *  *
To my surprise Don didn't appear happy at all. "Does that mean what I
think it does?" he demanded. "Do you think I'll get any satisfaction
out of being controlled _even there_?"
"I don't know about the pleasure," I said coldly, "but I do know that
it will improve your attitude."
Donald raged at me, his brain white with anger. "So help me God, Eu
Kor, someday I'm going to kill you for this! It's the ultimate insult."
"You're not going to do anything," I said calmly. His voice dissolved
into obscenity. For a moment I felt sorry for him until I remembered
the basic truth that none of us are free--and the most intelligent,
naturally, are the least free of all. They are bound by their
commitments, their duties, their responsibilities, and by their
intelligence itself. If a superior intelligence occasionally exhibits
petty lapses--which amuse him or relieve his boredom--it is not the
place of the less endowed to construe it as a sign of equality.
Some--like Ven and me--have known their place from birth. Others, like
Edith and Alice, learn easily with a minimum amount of pain. Some like
Grace learn hard; and some--like Donald--do not learn at all.
Donald was the eternal rebel, complying because he must, yet seething
with resentment because he did. He was the personification of drive
without innate control, ambition without humility, intelligence without
wisdom. As he had been, he was not quite enough. At best he would have
been a minor author and a petty domestic tyrant. He would never have
been a threat simply because he didn't have the ability or training.
But I had given him what he lacked. The knowledge I had impressed upon
his mind would give him a tremendous advantage over his fellow mammals,
and his tendencies toward domestic tyranny would expand to include
others. His glandular attitude would pervert his knowledge to the
detriment of humankind. He could become a thing so dangerous that it
could destroy this precariously balanced world.
I went into the ship and set up a world matrix on the computer, using
all the data I had accumulated, secured the answer, and then inserted
Donald's potential into the matrix. I then ordered a probability
extrapolation for both matrices, equating the solutions with survival.
The answers confirmed my thoughts. With the matrix as it stood, the
twenty year survival prediction was 65 per cent, which wasn't too bad
since few advanced-technology worlds have better than an 85 per cent
survival probability. But with Donald in the matrix, the survival
prediction was zero!
  *  *  *  *  *
I knew what I must do. I could not leave him behind as I had planned.
Nor could I inflict the senseless cruelty of brainblotting. He would
have to be mercifully destroyed.
Although I was fond of Donald, and his death would leave me sick for
weeks, it would not be right to let my creation live and condemn the
mammal race to death. I could not exterminate a race Authority had
created. The guilt syndrome would be shattering. Of course, if they
killed each other that was not my concern.
But until we left I would give him all the freedom he could use.
Outside of the minimum of control, he would be free to do and act as
he pleased. I didn't owe it to him, yet it was not his fault that he
had come into my hands. And when I returned to Thalassa I would tell
the Council what I had done and ask for justice. Perhaps we could save
this world from itself even as we had saved others. The question of
gratitude would be immaterial.
With a firm hand to set them on the track, the mammals might learn the
values of intelligence and cooperation before it was too late. They
might understand the realities of existence rather than fall victim to
their glandular fancies. They might. But if they did, one thing would
be certain--they would learn it the hard way. Donald was proof of that.
I went to our living quarters, and presently Ven joined me. "They're
all in for the night, Eu," she said.
"That's good. How are they coming along?"
"Splendidly. Another week should see the end of the training. Edith was
a good experience for me in handling these. I'm not making the mistakes
I did. I'm finding the blocks and removing them. One of them, the one
called Grace, should be even better than Edith."
"As a mount?" I asked with faint humor. "Or as a working proxy?"
"Both," Ven said promptly. "She's stronger and more intelligent. Yet
even so I think I shall always like Edith best."
  *  *  *  *  *
"One's first dependent is always one's fondest memory," I replied
sententiously, "But you'll forget them all when we're back on Thalassa."
"I won't," Ven said. "I'll never forget Edith."
"Never is a long time," I said gently. "I shall even forget the pain of
killing Donald some day."
"Then you've decided to eliminate him?" Ven said.
I nodded. "It's necessary," I said. "This world wouldn't be safe with
him alive."
"Poor Edith. She's fond of the brute," Ven said. She moved toward the
doorway.
"Where are you going?" I asked.
"I want to talk to Edith. Perhaps I can prepare her."
"No. Don't," I said. "Contact her if you wish, but tell her nothing."
"Very well," she said. I smiled as she disappeared. Ven was going to
miss her pet once we had left. It was obvious.
"Eu! Quick!" Ven's projection crackled in my brain. "They're fighting!
Edith's being hurt, and I can't touch them! They've set up a block!"
I ran for the control room, slapped the helmet on my head, reached for
the controls--and stopped, laughing.
"Stop them!" Ven screamed. Her aura blazed a brilliant white and her
projection nearly knocked me down. She reached for the control switch,
but I slapped her hand away.
"Quiet!" I snapped. "They're not fighting, you little fool! Turn on
your audio and listen and stop acting silly!"
Ven did as I told her and her aura changed to a fiery pink. "Oh!" she
said in a small voice, "but they never--"
I must have made some mistake in revising the controllers--or feedback
was stronger than I suspected--for the Va Krul syndrome came back
along our lines of contact with explosive force! Desperately I reached
for the switch--but my hand froze in midair as an intolerable wave
of emotion drove Ven and me together like two pieces of iron with
opposite magnetic charge! The last thing I remember was being enveloped
in the flaring golden glow of Ven's aura.
  *  *  *  *  *
I came to my senses in our living quarters. I was
stunned--exhausted--limp and gasping.
"Thalassa!" I said weakly, "we've _really_ done it now!"
Ven smiled a pale blue radiance at me. "You have become strong, living
on this heavy world," she said. "I like it."
"But--but!" I sputtered. "It was so--it can't--it couldn't--"
"But it did," Ven said softly. "And I'm glad it did."
"I don't mean that. What I mean to say was that it was so--"
"Unexpected?"
"No! So utterly--"
"Satisfying?" she asked.
"Stop interrupting! It was all of that and more. But what I want to say
is that we've violated the prime restriction for space travellers. How
could we do it?"
"You're forgetting that for some time we have been living upon this
emotion-charged world," Ven said. "The steady erosion was more than our
conditioning could take. The feedback was merely the last in a whole
series of disruptive stimuli. It was the trigger, but our defenses had
been weakened long before. Not that I'm sorry," she added quickly.
"For weeks I've been wondering what sort of a mate you'd be when this
trip was over. I'm not unhappy with the preview." She smiled at me and
the whole of our living quarters was filled with a bright tender blue.
"The natives," I said worriedly. "We were in contact with them."
Ven's aura darkened. "I had forgotten them," she said. "I hope that the
feedback wasn't intensified and returned to them. I'd better look." She
started for the control room and I followed more slowly.
"There's no damage," she said from beneath the helmet. "Edith feels
just as I do."
I took my helmet and coded Don's pattern on the selector. Peculiar, I
thought with vague wonder. Most peculiar. For the first time Donald and
I were in true rapport. His mind was slow, lazy, sluggish--even his
ambition was sated for the moment. Could it be, I wondered, that we
could find agreement through our _emotions_? Was it frustration that
drove him? Whatever the block had been it was gone now. This was a
true empathic meeting--something far more satisfying than our previous
conflict.
I relaxed in it, feeling the slow langorous questings of his mind even
as he felt mine. There was a sense of brotherhood that transcended
differences in race and culture. We were down to basics, on the oldest
meeting ground of life.
He was wondering idly what the outcome of this might be--conscious of
me, but careless. It jolted me. He might be uncertain, but I _knew_ Ven
was from good family stock, and "good" to a Thalassan meant something
entirely different than it commonly did to the natives of this planet!
I disengaged hurriedly and shook Ven out of her rapport with Edith.
"We've no time to lose," I said. "We must leave at once! You know
what's going to happen!"
"I know," Ven said. "I feel the changes already."
"That's just in your mind," I snapped.
"We're not going home," she said. There was a note of prophecy in her
voice. "We'll never make it."
"We can't stay here!"
"I know."
"Then what are we going to do?"
  *  *  *  *  *
We couldn't stay here. But we couldn't go home either. The trip would
take weeks, and hyperspace is fatal to a gravid Thalassan female.
That was something we learned long ago, and the principal reason for
continence-conditioning for couples in space. What was more, I knew
that where Ven stayed, I would stay.
"Remember the fourth planet of this system?" Ven asked.
"Yes. Ideal gravity, adequate oxygen, but too cold."
"And with no intelligent life," Ven added. "That's an advantage--and
we can beat the cold. It wouldn't be too hard to build domes. We have
plenty of power metal, and a matricizer. We could hatch our clutch
there. With the mammals to help us, we should be able to make a
comfortable enough life for the forty years it'll take to bring our
offspring to maturity. We should be able to do this easily, and still
get home before we're strangers."
"Hmm," I said. "It's possible. And we can use this world for a supply
base. But would you care to live on that cold barren planet?"
"There are worse places," she said matter-of-factly. "And we'd be close
to everything we'd need."
It did have possibilities. And the mammals could be adapted. They were
a more advanced evolutionary form than we, but lower on the adaptive
scale--nonspecialized--more so than any other intelligent race I had
encountered.
Ven said, "We would actually be doing their race a favor, if the
computation of this world's future is correct. Some of them would still
survive if this planet commits suicide. And if the prediction is wrong,
we would have done no harm. If they reach space, they'll merely find
that they've already arrived when they reach the fourth planet."
"Which might be something of a surprise to their explorers," I said
with a chuckle. "All right. We'll play it your way."
I was pretty sure how Donald would take this. He was going to be
furious, but after all one doesn't make a pet of a wolf and then turn
it loose. It's too hard on the livestock. But I didn't think he'd be
too unhappy. He'd be the principal human on Mars; and after we left
he'd be ruler of a world. And in the meantime he could be a domestic
tyrant.
It was fortunate, I thought with a smile, that mammals were essentially
polygamous. Donald would make some nasty comments about being a herd
sire--but I didn't think his comments would be too sincere. After all,
it's not every man that has a chance to become a founding father.
I was still smiling as I turned the dials on the controller and flipped
the switch. Founding father--the title was as much mine as his!
CONTAGION
By KATHERINE MacLEAN
Minos was such a lovely planet. Not a thing
seemed wrong with it. Excepting the food,
perhaps. And a disease that wasn't really.
It was like an Earth forest in the fall, but it was not fall. The
forest leaves were green and copper and purple and fiery red, and a
wind sent patches of bright greenish sunlight dancing among the leaf
shadows.
The hunt party of the _Explorer_ filed along the narrow trail, guns
ready, walking carefully, listening to the distant, half familiar cries
of strange birds.
A faint crackle of static in their earphones indicated that a gun had
been fired.
"Got anything?" asked June Walton. The helmet intercom carried her
voice to the ears of the others without breaking the stillness of the
forest.
"Took a shot at something," explained George Barton's cheerful voice
in her earphones. She rounded a bend of the trail and came upon Barton
standing peering up into the trees, his gun still raised. "It looked
like a duck."
"This isn't Central Park," said Hal Barton, his brother, coming into
sight. His green spacesuit struck an incongruous note against the
bronze and red forest. "They won't all look like ducks," he said
soberly.
"Maybe some will look like dragons. Don't get eaten by a dragon,
June," came Max's voice quietly into her earphones. "Not while I still
love you." He came out of the trees carrying the blood sample kit, and
touched her glove with his, the grin on his ugly beloved face barely
visible in the mingled light and shade. A patch of sunlight struck a
greenish glint from his fishbowl helmet.
  *  *  *  *  *
They walked on. A quarter of a mile back, the space ship _Explorer_
towered over the forest like a tapering skyscraper, and the people of
the ship looked out of the viewplates at fresh winds and sunlight and
clouds, and they longed to be outside.
But the likeness to Earth was danger, and the cool wind might be death,
for if the animals were like Earth animals, their diseases might be
like Earth diseases, alike enough to be contagious, different enough to
be impossible to treat. There was warning enough in the past. Colonies
had vanished, and traveled spaceways drifted with the corpses of ships
which had touched on some plague planet.
The people of the ship waited while their doctors, in airtight
spacesuits, hunted animals to test them for contagion.
The four medicos, for June Walton was also a doctor, filed through the
alien homelike forest, walking softly, watching for motion among the
copper and purple shadows.
They saw it suddenly, a lighter moving copper patch among the darker
browns. Reflex action swung June's gun into line, and behind her
someone's gun went off with a faint crackle of static, and made a hole
in the leaves beside the specimen. Then for a while no one moved.
This one looked like a man, a magnificently muscled, leanly graceful,
humanlike animal. Even in its callused bare feet, it was a head taller
than any of them. Red-haired, hawk-faced and darkly tanned, it stood
breathing heavily, looking at them without expression. At its side hung
a sheath knife, and a crossbow was slung across one wide shoulder.
They lowered their guns.
"It needs a shave," Max said reasonably in their earphones, and he
reached up to his helmet and flipped the switch that let his voice be
heard. "Something we could do for you, Mac?"
The friendly drawl was the first voice that had broken the forest
sounds. June smiled suddenly. He was right. The strict logic of
evolution did not demand beards; therefore a non-human would not be
wearing a three day growth of red stubble.
Still panting, the tall figure licked dry lips and spoke. "Welcome to
Minos. The Mayor sends greetings from Alexandria."
"English?" gasped June.
"We were afraid you would take off again before I could bring word to
you.... It's three hundred miles.... We saw your scout plane pass
twice, but we couldn't attract its attention."
  *  *  *  *  *
June looked in stunned silence at the stranger leaning against the
tree. Thirty-six light years--thirty-six times six trillion miles
of monotonous space travel--to be told that the planet was already
settled! "We didn't know there was a colony here," she said. "It is not
on the map."
"We were afraid of that," the tall bronze man answered soberly. "We
have been here three generations and yet no traders have come."
Max shifted the kit strap on his shoulder and offered a hand. "My name
is Max Stark, M.D. This is June Walton, M.D., Hal Barton, M.D., and
George Barton, Hal's brother, also M.D."
"Patrick Mead is the name," smiled the man, shaking hands casually.
"Just a hunter and bridge carpenter myself. Never met any medicos
before."
The grip was effortless but even through her airproofed glove June
could feel that the fingers that touched hers were as hard as padded
steel.
"What--what is the population of Minos?" she asked.
He looked down at her curiously for a moment before answering. "Only
one hundred and fifty." He smiled. "Don't worry, this isn't a city
planet yet. There's room for a few more people." He shook hands with
the Bartons quickly. "That is--you are people, aren't you?" he asked
startlingly.
"Why not?" said Max with a poise that June admired.
"Well, you are all so--so--" Patrick Mead's eyes roamed across the
faces of the group. "So varied."
They could find no meaning in that, and stood puzzled.
"I mean," Patrick Mead said into the silence, "all these--interesting
different hair colors and face shapes and so forth--" He made a vague
wave with one hand as if he had run out of words or was anxious not to
insult them.
"Joke?" Max asked, bewildered.
June laid a hand on his arm. "No harm meant," she said to him over the
intercom. "We're just as much of a shock to him as he is to us."
She addressed a question to the tall colonist on outside sound. "What
should a person look like, Mr. Mead?"
He indicated her with a smile. "Like you."
June stepped closer and stood looking up at him, considering her own
description. She was tall and tanned, like him; had a few freckles,
like him; and wavy red hair, like his. She ignored the brightly
humorous blue eyes.
"In other words," she said, "everyone on the planet looks like you and
me?"
Patrick Mead took another look at their four faces and began to grin.
"Like me, I guess. But I hadn't thought of it before. I did not think
that people could have different colored hair or that noses could fit
so many ways onto faces. I was judging by my own appearance, but I
suppose any fool can walk on his hands and say the world is upside
down!" He laughed and sobered. "But then why wear spacesuits? The air
is breathable."
"For safety," June told him. "We can't take any chances on plague."
Pat Mead was wearing nothing but a loin cloth and his weapons, and the
wind ruffled his hair. He looked comfortable, and they longed to take
off the stuffy spacesuits and feel the wind against their own skins.
Minos was like home, like Earth.... But they were strangers.
"Plague," Pat Mead said thoughtfully. "We had one here. It came two
years after the colony arrived and killed everyone except the Mead
families. They were immune. I guess we look alike because we're all
related, and that's why I grew up thinking that it is the only way
people can look."
_Plague._ "What was the disease?" Hal Barton asked.
"Pretty gruesome, according to my father. They called it the melting
sickness. The doctors died too soon to find out what it was or what to
do about it."
"You should have trained for more doctors, or sent to civilization for
some." A trace of impatience was in George Barton's voice.
Pat Mead explained patiently, "Our ship, with the power plant and all
the books we needed, went off into the sky to avoid the contagion,
and never came back. The crew must have died." Long years of hardship
were indicated by that statement, a colony with electric power gone
and machinery stilled, with key technicians dead and no way to replace
them. June realized then the full meaning of the primitive sheath knife
and bow.
"Any recurrence of melting sickness?" asked Hal Barton.
"No."
"Any other diseases?"
"Not a one."
Max was eyeing the bronze red-headed figure with something approaching
awe. "Do you think all the Meads look like that?" he said to June on
the intercom. "I wouldn't mind being a Mead myself!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Their job had been made easy by the coming of Pat. They went back to
the ship laughing, exchanging anecdotes with him. There was nothing
now to keep Minos from being the home they wanted, except the melting
sickness, and, forewarned against it, they could take precautions.
The polished silver and black column of the _Explorer_ seemed to rise
higher and higher over the trees as they neared it. Then its symmetry
blurred all sense of specific size as they stepped out from among the
trees and stood on the edge of the meadow, looking up.
"Nice!" said Pat. "Beautiful!" The admiration in his voice was warming.
"It was a yacht," Max said, still looking up, "second hand, an old-time
beauty without a sign of wear. Synthetic diamond-studded control board
and murals on the walls. It doesn't have the new speed drives, but it
brought us thirty-six light years in one and a half subjective years.
Plenty good enough."
The tall tanned man looked faintly wistful, and June realized that
he had never had access to a full library, never seen a movie, never
experienced luxury. He had been born and raised on Minos.
  *  *  *  *  *
"May I go aboard?" Pat asked hopefully.
Max unslung the specimen kit from his shoulder, laid it on the carpet
of plants that covered the ground and began to open it.
"Tests first," Hal Barton said. "We have to find out if you people
still carry this so-called melting sickness. We'll have to de-microbe
you and take specimens before we let you on board. Once on, you'll be
no good as a check for what the other Meads might have."
Max was taking out a rack and a stand of preservative bottles and
hypodermics.
"Are you going to jab me with those?" Pat asked with interest.
"You're just a specimen animal to me, bud!" Max grinned at Pat Mead,
and Pat grinned back. June saw that they were friends already, the
tall pantherish colonist, and the wry, black-haired doctor. She felt a
stab of guilt because she loved Max and yet could pity him for being
smaller and frailer than Pat Mead.
"Lie down," Max told him, "and hold still. We need two spinal fluid
samples from the back, a body cavity one in front, and another from the
arm."
Pat lay down obediently. Max knelt, and, as he spoke, expertly swabbed
and inserted needles with the smooth speed that had made him a fine
nerve surgeon on Earth.
High above them the scout helioplane came out of an opening in the ship
and angled off toward the west, its buzz diminishing. Then, suddenly,
it veered and headed back, and Reno Unrich's voice came tinnily from
their earphones:
"What's that you've got? Hey, what are you docs doing down there?" He
banked again and came to a stop, hovering fifty feet away. June could
see his startled face looking through the glass at Pat.
Hal Barton switched to a narrow radio beam, explained rapidly and
pointed in the direction of Alexandria. Reno's plane lifted and flew
away over the odd-colored forest.
"The plane will drop a note on your town, telling them you got
through to us," Hal Barton told Pat, who was sitting up watching Max
dexterously put the blood and spinal fluids into the right bottles
without exposing them to air.
"We won't be free to contact your people until we know if they still
carry melting sickness," Max added. "You might be immune so it doesn't
show on you, but still carry enough germs--if that's what caused it--to
wipe out a planet."
"If you do carry melting sickness," said Hal Barton, "we won't be able
to mingle with your people until we've cleared them of the disease."
"Starting with me?" Pat asked.
"Starting with you," Max told him ruefully, "as soon as you step on
board."
"More needles?"
"Yes, and a few little extras thrown in."
"Rough?"
"It isn't easy."
A few minutes later, standing in the stalls for spacesuit
decontamination, being buffeted by jets of hot disinfectant, bathed in
glares of sterilizing ultraviolet radiation, June remembered that and
compared Pat Mead's treatment to theirs.
In the _Explorer_, stored carefully in sealed tanks and containers,
was the ultimate, multi-purpose cureall. It was a solution of enzymes
so like the key catalysts of the human cell nucleus that it caused
chemical derangement and disintegration in any non-human cell. Nothing
could live in contact with it but human cells; any alien intruder to
the body would die. Nucleocat Cureall was its trade name.
But the cureall alone was not enough for complete safety. Plagues had
been known to slay too rapidly and universally to be checked by human
treatment. Doctors are not reliable; they die. Therefore spaceways and
interplanetary health law demanded that ship equipment for guarding
against disease be totally mechanical in operation, rapid and efficient.
Somewhere near them, in a series of stalls which led around and
around like a rabbit maze, Pat was being herded from stall to stall
by peremptory mechanical voices, directed to soap and shower, ordered
to insert his arm into a slot which took a sample of his blood, given
solutions to drink, bathed in germicidal ultraviolet, shaken by sonic
blasts, breathing air thick with sprays of germicidal mists, being
directed to put his arms into other slots where they were anesthesized
and injected with various immunizing solutions.
Finally, he would be put in a room of high temperature and extreme
dryness, and instructed to sit for half an hour while more fluids were
dripped into his veins through long thin tubes.
All legal spaceships were built for safety. No chance was taken of
allowing a suspected carrier to bring an infection on board with him.
  *  *  *  *  *
June stepped from the last shower stall into the locker room, zipped
off her spacesuit with a sigh of relief, and contemplated herself in a
wall mirror. Red hair, dark blue eyes, tall....
"I've got a good figure," she said thoughtfully.
Max turned at the door. "Why this sudden interest in your looks?" he
asked suspiciously. "Do we stand here and admire you, or do we finally
get something to eat?"
"Wait a minute." She went to a wall phone and dialed it carefully,
using a combination from the ship's directory. "How're you doing, Pat?"
The phone picked up a hissing of water or spray. There was a startled
chuckle. "Voices, too! Hello, June. How do you tell a machine to go
jump in the lake?"
"Are you hungry?"
"No food since yesterday."
"We'll have a banquet ready for you when you get out," she told Pat and
hung up, smiling. Pat Mead's voice had a vitality and enjoyment which
made shipboard talk sound like sad artificial gaiety in contrast.
They looked into the nearby small laboratory where twelve squealing
hamsters were protestingly submitting to a small injection each of
Pat's blood. In most of them the injection was followed by one of
antihistaminics and adaptives. Otherwise the hamster defense system
would treat all non-hamster cells as enemies, even the harmless human
blood cells, and fight back against them violently.
One hamster, the twelfth, was given an extra large dose of adaptive,
so that if there were a disease, he would not fight it or the human
cells, and thus succumb more rapidly.
"How ya doing, George?" Max asked.
"Routine," George Barton grunted absently.
On the way up the long spiral ramps to the dining hall, they passed a
viewplate. It showed a long scene of mountains in the distance on the
horizon, and between them, rising step by step as they grew farther
away, the low rolling hills, bronze and red with patches of clear green
where there were fields.
Someone was looking out, standing very still, as if she had been
there a long time--Bess St. Clair, a Canadian woman. "It looks like
Winnipeg," she told them as they paused. "When are you doctors going to
let us out of this blithering barberpole? Look," she pointed. "See that
patch of field on the south hillside, with the brook winding through
it? I've staked that hillside for our house. When do we get out?"
  *  *  *  *  *
Reno Ulrich's tiny scout plane buzzed slowly in from the distance and
began circling lazily.
"Sooner than you think," Max told her. "We've discovered a castaway
colony on the planet. They've done our tests for us by just living
here. If there's anything here to catch, they've caught it."
"People on Minos?" Bess's handsome ruddy face grew alive with
excitement.
"One of them is down in the medical department," June said. "He'll be
out in twenty minutes."
"May I go see him?"
"Sure," said Max. "Show him the way to the dining hall when he gets
out. Tell him we sent you."
"Right!" She turned and ran down the ramp like a small girl going to a
fire. Max grinned at June and she grinned back. After a year and a half
of isolation in space, everyone was hungry for the sight of new faces,
the sound of unfamiliar voices.
  *  *  *  *  *
They climbed the last two turns to the cafeteria, and entered to a rich
subdued blend of soft music and quiet conversations. The cafeteria
was a section of the old dining room, left when the rest of the ship
had been converted to living and working quarters, and it still had
the original finely grained wood of the ceiling and walls, the sound
absorbency, the soft music spools and the intimate small light at each
table where people leisurely ate and talked.
They stood in line at the hot foods counter, and behind her June
could hear a girl's voice talking excitedly through the murmur of
conversation.
"--new man, honest! I saw him through the viewplate when they came in.
He's down in the medical department. A real frontiersman."
The line drew abreast of the counters, and she and Max chose three
heaping trays, starting with hydroponic mushroom steak, raised in
the growing trays of water and chemicals; sharp salad bowl with rose
tomatoes and aromatic peppers; tank-grown fish with special sauce; four
different desserts, and assorted beverages.
Presently they had three tottering trays successfully maneuvered to a
table. Brant St. Clair came over. "I beg your pardon, Max, but they are
saying something about Reno carrying messages to a colony of savages,
for the medical department. Will he be back soon, do you know?"
Max smiled up at him, his square face affectionate. Everyone liked the
shy Canadian. "He's back already. We just saw him come in."
"Oh, fine." St. Clair beamed. "I had an appointment with him to go out
and confirm what looks like a nice vein of iron to the northeast. Have
you seen Bess? Oh--there she is." He turned swiftly and hurried away.
A very tall man with fiery red hair came in surrounded by an eagerly
talking crowd of ship people. It was Pat Mead. He stood in the doorway,
alertly scanning the dining room. Sheer vitality made him seem even
larger than he was. Sighting June, he smiled and began to thread toward
their table.
"Look!" said someone. "There's the colonist!" Shelia, a pretty, jeweled
woman, followed and caught his arm. "Did you _really_ swim across a
river to come here?"
Overflowing with good-will and curiosity, people approached from all
directions. "Did you actually walk three hundred miles? Come, eat with
us. Let me help choose your tray."
Everyone wanted him to eat at their table, everyone was a specialist
and wanted data about Minos. They all wanted anecdotes about hunting
wild animals with a bow and arrow.
"He needs to be rescued," Max said. "He won't have a chance to eat."
June and Max got up firmly, edged through the crowd, captured Pat and
escorted him back to their table. June found herself pleased to be
claiming the hero of the hour.
  *  *  *  *  *
Pat sat in the simple, subtly designed chair and leaned back almost
voluptuously, testing the way it gave and fitted itself to him. He
ran his eyes over the bright tableware and heaped plates. He looked
around at the rich grained walls and soft lights at each table. He said
nothing, just looking and feeling and experiencing.
"When we build our town and leave the ship," June explained, "we
will turn all the staterooms back into the lounges and ballrooms and
cocktail bars that used to be inside."
"Oh, I'm not complaining," Pat said negligently. He cocked his head to
the music, and tried to locate its source.
"That's big of you," said Max with gentle irony.
They fell to, Pat beginning the first meal he had had in more than a
day.
Most of the other diners finished when they were halfway through,
and began walking over, diffidently at first, then in another wave
of smiling faces, handshakes, and introductions. Pat was asked about
crops, about farming methods, about rainfall and floods, about farm
animals and plant breeding, about the compatibility of imported Earth
seeds with local ground, about mines and strata.
There was no need to protect him. He leaned back in his chair and
drawled answers with the lazy ease of a panther; where he could think
of no statistic, he would fill the gap with an anecdote. It developed
that he enjoyed spinning campfire yarns and especially being the center
of interest.
Between bouts of questions, he ate with undiminished and glowing relish.
June noticed that the female specialists were prolonging the questions
more than they needed, clustering around the table laughing at his
jokes, until presently Pat was almost surrounded by pretty faces,
eager questions, and chiming laughs. Shelia the beautiful laughed most
chimingly of all.
June nudged Max, and Max shrugged indifferently. It wasn't anything a
man would pay attention to, perhaps. But June watched Pat for a moment
more, then glanced uneasily back to Max. He was eating and listening
to Pat's answers and did not feel her gaze. For some reason Max looked
almost shrunken to her. He was shorter than she had realized; she had
forgotten that he was only the same height as herself. She was dimly
aware of the clear lilting chatter of female voices increasing at Pat's
end of the table.
"That guy's a menace," Max said, and laughed to himself, cutting
another slice of hydroponic mushroom steak. "What's eating you?" he
added, glancing aside at her when he noticed her sudden stillness.
"Nothing," she said hastily, but she did not turn back to watching Pat
Mead. She felt disloyal. Pat was only a superb animal. Max was the man
she loved. Or--was he? Of course he was, she told herself angrily.
They had gone colonizing together because they wanted to spend their
lives together; she had never thought of marrying any other man. Yet
the sense of dissatisfaction persisted, and along with it a feeling of
guilt.
Len Marlow, the protein tank-culture technician responsible for the
mushroom steaks, had wormed his way into the group and asked Pat a
question. Now he was saying, "I don't dig you, Pat. It sounds like
you're putting the people into the tanks instead of the vegetables!" He
glanced at them, looking puzzled. "See if you two can make anything of
this. It sounds medical to me."
Pat leaned back and smiled, sipping a glass of hydroponic burgundy.
"Wonderful stuff. You'll have to show us how to make it."
Len turned back to him. "You people live off the country, right? You
hunt and bring in steaks and eat them, right? Well, say I have one of
those steaks right here and I want to eat it, what happens?"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Go ahead and eat it. It just wouldn't digest. You'd stay hungry."
"Why?" Len was aggrieved.
"Chemical differences in the basic protoplasm of Minos. Different
amino linkages, left-handed instead of right-handed molecules in the
carbohydrates, things like that. Nothing will be digestible here until
you are adapted chemically by a little test-tube evolution. Till then
you'd starve to death on a full stomach."
Pat's side of the table had been loaded with the dishes from two trays,
but it was almost clear now and the dishes were stacked neatly to one
side. He started on three desserts, thoughtfully tasting each in turn.
"Test-tube evolution?" Max repeated. "What's that? I thought you people
had no doctors."
"It's a story." Pat leaned back again. "Alexander P. Mead, the head of
the Mead clan, was a plant geneticist, a very determined personality
and no man to argue with. He didn't want us to go through the struggle
of killing off all Minos plants and putting in our own, spoiling the
face of the planet and upsetting the balance of its ecology. He decided
that he would adapt our genes to this planet or kill us trying. He did
it all right.'"
"Did which?" asked June, suddenly feeling a sourceless prickle of fear.
"Adapted us to Minos. He took human cells--"
  *  *  *  *  *
She listened intently, trying to find a reason for fear in the
explanation. It would have taken many human generations to adapt to
Minos by ordinary evolution, and that only at a heavy toll of death and
hunger which evolution exacts. There was a shorter way: Human cells
have the ability to return to their primeval condition of independence,
hunting, eating and reproducing alone.
Alexander P. Mead took human cells and made them into phagocytes.
He put them through the hard savage school of evolution--a thousand
generations of multiplication, hardship and hunger, with the alien
indigestible food always present, offering its reward of plenty to the
cell that reluctantly learned to absorb it.
"Leucocytes can run through several thousand generations of evolution
in six months," Pat Mead finished. "When they reached to a point where
they would absorb Minos food, he planted them back in the people he
had taken them from."
"What was supposed to happen then?" Max asked, leaning forward.
"I don't know exactly how it worked. He never told anybody much about
it, and when I was a little boy he had gone loco and was wandering
ha-ha-ing around waving a test tube. Fell down a ravine and broke his
neck at the age of eighty."
"A character," Max said.
Why was she afraid? "It worked then?"
"Yes. He tried it on all the Meads the first year. The other settlers
didn't want to be experimented on until they saw how it worked out. It
worked. The Meads could hunt, and plant while the other settlers were
still eating out of hydroponics tanks."
"It worked," said Max to Len. "You're a plant geneticist and a tank
culture expert. There's a job for you."
"Uh-_uh_!" Len backed away. "It sounds like a medical problem to me.
Human cell control--right up your alley."
"It is a one-way street," Pat warned. "Once it is done, you won't be
able to digest ship food. I'll get no good from this protein. I ate it
just for the taste."
Hal Barton appeared quietly beside the table. "Three of the twelve test
hamsters have died," he reported, and turned to Pat. "Your people carry
the germs of melting sickness, as you call it. The dead hamsters were
injected with blood taken from you before you were de-infected. We
can't settle here unless we de-infect everybody on Minos. Would they
object?"
"We wouldn't want to give you folks germs," Pat smiled. "Anything for
safety. But there'll have to be a vote on it first."
The doctors went to Reno Ulrich's table and walked with him to the
hangar, explaining. He was to carry the proposal to Alexandria, mingle
with the people, be persuasive and wait for them to vote before
returning. He was to give himself shots of cureall every two hours on
the hour or run the risk of disease.
  *  *  *  *  *
Reno was pleased. He had dabbled in sociology before retraining as a
mechanic for the expedition. "This gives me a chance to study their
mores." He winked wickedly. "I may not be back for several nights."
They watched through the viewplate as he took off, and then went over
to the laboratory for a look at the hamsters.
Three were alive and healthy, munching lettuce. One was the control;
the other two had been given shots of Pat's blood from before he
entered the ship, but with no additional treatment. Apparently a
hamster could fight off melting sickness easily if left alone. Three
were still feverish and ruffled, with a low red blood count, but
recovering. The three dead ones had been given strong shots of adaptive
and counter histamine, so their bodies had not fought back against the
attack.
June glanced at the dead animals hastily and looked away again.
They lay twisted with a strange semi-fluid limpness, as if ready to
dissolve. The last hamster, which had been given the heaviest dose
of adaptive, had apparently lost all its hair before death. It was
hairless and pink, like a still-born baby.
"We can find no micro-organisms," George Barton said. "None at all.
Nothing in the body that should not be there. Leucosis and anemia.
Fever only for the ones that fought it off." He handed Max some
temperature charts and graphs of blood counts.
June wandered out into the hall. Pediatrics and obstetrics were her
field; she left the cellular research to Max, and just helped him with
laboratory routine. The strange mood followed her out into the hall,
then abruptly lightened.
Coming toward her, busily telling a tale of adventure to the gorgeous
Shelia Davenport, was a tall, red-headed, magnificently handsome man.
It was his handsomeness which made Pat such a pleasure to look upon
and talk with, she guiltily told herself, and it was his tremendous
vitality.... It was like meeting a movie hero in the flesh, or a hero
out of the pages of a book--Deer-slayer, John Clayton, Lord Greystoke.
She waited in the doorway to the laboratory and made no move to join
them, merely acknowledged the two with a nod and a smile and a casual
lift of the hand. They nodded and smiled back.
"Hello, June," said Pat and continued telling his tale, but as they
passed he lightly touched her arm.
"Oh, pioneer!" she said mockingly and softly to his passing profile,
and knew that he had heard.
  *  *  *  *  *
That night she had a nightmare. She was running down a long corridor
looking for Max, but every man she came to was a big bronze man with
red hair and bright blue eyes who grinned at her.
The pink hamster! She woke suddenly, feeling as if alarm bells had been
ringing, and listened carefully, but there was no sound. She had had a
nightmare, she told herself, but alarm bells were still ringing in her
unconscious. Something was wrong.
Lying still and trying to preserve the images, she groped for a
meaning, but the mood faded under the cold touch of reason. Damn
intuitive thinking! A pink hamster! Why did the unconscious have to be
so vague? She fell asleep again and forgot.
They had lunch with Pat Mead that day, and after it was over Pat
delayed June with a hand on her shoulder and looked down at her for a
moment. "I want you, June," he said and then turned away, answering the
hails of a party at another table as if he had not spoken. She stood
shaken, and then walked to the door where Max waited.
She was particularly affectionate with Max the rest of the day, and it
pleased him. He would not have been if he had known why. She tried to
forget Pat's blunt statement.
June was in the laboratory with Max, watching the growth of a small
tank culture of the alien protoplasm from a Minos weed, and listening
to Len Marlow pour out his troubles.
"And Elsie tags around after that big goof all day, listening to his
stories. And then she tells me I'm just jealous, I'm imagining things!"
He passed his hand across his eyes. "I came away from Earth to be with
Elsie.... I'm getting a headache. Look, can't you persuade Pat to cut
it out, June? You and Max are his friends."
"Here, have an aspirin," June said. "We'll see what we can do."
"Thanks." Len picked up his tank culture and went out, not at all
cheered.
  *  *  *  *  *
Max sat brooding over the dials and meters at his end of the
laboratory, apparently sunk in thought. When Len had gone, he spoke
almost harshly.
"Why encourage the guy? Why let him hope?"
"Found out anything about the differences in protoplasm?" she evaded.
"Why let him kid himself? What chance has he got against that hunk of
muscle and smooth talk?"
"But Pat isn't after Elsie," she protested.
"Every scatter-brained woman on this ship is trailing after Pat with
her tongue hanging out. Brant St. Clair is in the bar right now.
He doesn't say what he is drinking about, but do you think Pat is
resisting all these women crowding down on him?"
"There are other things besides looks and charm," she said, grimly
trying to concentrate on a slide under her binocular microscope.
"Yeah, and whatever they are, Pat has them, too. Who's more competent
to support a woman and a family on a frontier planet than a handsome
bruiser who was born here?"
"I meant," June spun around on her stool with unexpected passion,
"there is old friendship, and there's fondness, and memories, and
loyalty!" She was half shouting.
"They're not worth much on the second-hand market," Max said. He was
sitting slumped on his lab stool, looking dully at his dials. "Now
_I'm_ getting a headache!" He smiled ruefully. "No kidding, a real
headache. And over other people's troubles yet!"
Other people's troubles.... She got up and wandered out into the long
curving halls. "I want you June," Pat's voice repeated in her mind.
Why did the man have to be so overpoweringly attractive, so glaring a
contrast to Max? Why couldn't the universe manage to run on without
generating troublesome love triangles?
  *  *  *  *  *
She walked up the curving ramps to the dining hall where they had eaten
and drunk and talked yesterday. It was empty except for one couple
talking forehead to forehead over cold coffee.
She turned and wandered down the long easy spiral of corridor to
the pharmacy and dispensary. It was empty. George was probably in
the test lab next door, where he could hear if he was wanted. The
automatic vendor of harmless euphorics, stimulants and opiates stood
in the corner, brightly decorated in pastel abstract designs, with its
automatic tabulator graph glowing above it.
Max had a headache, she remembered. She recorded her thumbprint in the
machine and pushed the plunger for a box of aspirins, trying to focus
her attention on the problem of adapting the people of the ship to
the planet Minos. An aquarium tank with a faint solution of histamine
would be enough to convert a piece of human skin into a community of
voracious active phagocytes individually seeking something to devour,
but could they eat enough to live away from the rich sustaining plasma
of human blood?
After the aspirins, she pushed another plunger for something for
herself. Then she stood looking at it, a small box with three pills in
her hand--Theobromine, a heart strengthener and a confidence-giving
euphoric all in one, something to steady shaky nerves. She had used it
before only in emergency. She extended a hand and looked at it. It was
trembling. Damn triangles!
While she was looking at her hand there was a click from the automatic
drug vendor. It summed the morning use of each drug in the vendors
throughout the ship, and recorded it in a neat addition to the end of
each graph line. For a moment she could not find the green line for
anodynes and the red line for stimulants, and then she saw that they
went almost straight up.
There were too many being used--far too many to be explained by
jealousy or psychosomatic peevishness. This was an epidemic, and only
one disease was possible!
The disinfecting of Pat had not succeeded. Nucleocat Cureall, killer of
all infections, had not cured! Pat had brought melting sickness into
the ship with him!
Who had it?
The drugs vendor glowed cheerfully, uncommunicative. She opened a
panel in its side and looked in on restless interlacing cogs, and on
the inside of the door saw printed some directions.... "To remove or
examine records before reaching end of the reel--"
After a few fumbling minutes she had the answer. In the cafeteria at
breakfast and lunch, thirty-eight men out of the forty-eight aboard
ship had taken more than his norm of stimulant. Twenty-one had taken
aspirin as well. The only woman who had made an unusual purchase was
herself!
She remembered the hamsters that had thrown off the infection with a
short sharp fever, and checked back in the records to the day before.
There was a short rise in aspirin sales to women at late afternoon. The
women were safe.
It was the men who had melting sickness!
Melting sickness killed in hours, according to Pat Mead. How long had
the men been sick?
  *  *  *  *  *
As she was leaving, Jerry came into the pharmacy, recorded his
thumbprint and took a box of aspirin from the machine.
She felt all right. Self-control was working well and it was pleasant
still to walk down the corridor smiling at the people who passed.
She took the emergency elevator to the control room and showed her
credentials to the technician on watch.
"Medical Emergency." At a small control panel in the corner was a large
red button, precisely labeled. She considered it and picked up the
control room phone. This was the hard part, telling someone, especially
someone who had it--Max.
She dialed, and when the click on the end of the line showed he had
picked the phone up, she told Max what she had seen.
"No women, just the men," he repeated. "That right?"
"Yes."
"Probably it's chemically alien, inhibited by one of the female sex
hormones. We'll try sex hormone shots, if we have to. Where are you
calling from?"
She told him.
"That's right. Give Nucleocat Cureall another chance. It might work
this time. Push that button."
She went to the panel and pushed the large red button. Through the
long height of the _Explorer_, bells woke to life and began to ring
in frightened clangor, emergency doors thumped shut, mechanical
apparatus hummed into life and canned voices began to give rapid urgent
directions.
A plague had come.
  *  *  *  *  *
She obeyed the mechanical orders, went out into the hall and walked in
line with the others. The captain walked ahead of her and the gorgeous
Shelia Davenport fell into step beside her. "I look like a positive hag
this morning. Does that mean I'm sick? Are we all sick?"
June shrugged, unwilling to say what she knew.
Others came out of all rooms into the corridor, thickening the line.
They could hear each room lock as the last person left it, and then,
faintly, the hiss of disinfectant spray. Behind them, on the heels of
the last person in line, segments of the ship slammed off and began to
hiss.
They wound down the spiral corridor until they reached the medical
treatment section again, and there they waited in line.
"It won't scar my arms, will it?" asked Shelia apprehensively,
glancing at her smooth, lovely arms.
The mechanical voice said, "Next. Step inside, please, and stand clear
of the door."
"Not a bit," June reassured Shelia, and stepped into the cubicle.
Inside, she was directed from cubicle to cubicle and given the usual
buffeting by sprays and radiation, had blood samples taken and was
injected with Nucleocat and a series of other protectives. At last she
was directed through another door into a tiny cubicle with a chair.
"You are to wait here," commanded the recorded voice metallically. "In
twenty minutes the door will unlock and you may then leave. All people
now treated may visit all parts of the ship which have been protected.
It is forbidden to visit any quarantined or unsterile part of the ship
without permission from the medical officers."
Presently the door unlocked and she emerged into bright lights again,
feeling slightly battered.
She was in the clinic. A few men sat on the edge of beds and looked
sick. One was lying down. Brant and Bess St. Clair sat near each other,
not speaking.
Approaching her was George Barton, reading a thermometer with a puzzled
expression.
"What is it, George?" she asked anxiously.
"Some of the women have slight fever, but it's going down. None of the
fellows have any--but their white count is way up, their red count is
way down, and they look sick to me."
She approached St. Clair. His usually ruddy cheeks were pale, his pulse
was light and too fast, and his skin felt clammy. "How's the headache?
Did the Nucleocat treatment help?"
"I feel worse, if anything."
"Better set up beds," she told George. "Get everyone back into the
clinic."
"We're doing that," George assured her. "That's what Hal is doing."
She went back to the laboratory. Max was pacing up and down, absently
running his hands through his black hair until it stood straight up. He
stopped when he saw her face, and scowled thoughtfully. "They are still
sick?" It was more a statement than a question.
She nodded.
"The Cureall didn't cure this time," he muttered. "That leaves it up
to us. We have melting sickness and according to Pat and the hamsters,
that leaves us less than a day to find out what it is and learn how to
stop it."
Suddenly an idea for another test struck him and he moved to the work
table to set it up. He worked rapidly, with an occasional uncoordinated
movement betraying his usual efficiency.
It was strange to see Max troubled and afraid.
She put on a laboratory smock and began to work. She worked in
silence. The mechanicals had failed. Hal and George Barton were busy
staving off death from the weaker cases and trying to gain time for Max
and her to work. The problem of the plague had to be solved by the two
of them alone. It was in their hands.
Another test, no results. Another test, no results. Max's hands were
shaking and he stopped a moment to take stimulants.
She went into the ward for a moment, found Bess and warned her quietly
to tell the other women to be ready to take over if the men became too
sick to go on. "But tell them calmly. We don't want to frighten the
men." She lingered in the ward long enough to see the word spread among
the women in a widening wave of paler faces and compressed lips; then
she went back to the laboratory.
Another test. There was no sign of a micro-organism in anyone's blood,
merely a growing horde of leucocytes and phagocytes, prowling as if
mobilized to repel invasion.
  *  *  *  *  *
Len Marlow was wheeled in unconscious, with Hal Barton's written
comments and conclusions pinned to the blanket.
"I don't feel so well myself," the assistant complained. "The air feels
thick. I can't breathe."
June saw that his lips were blue. "Oxygen short," she told Max.
"Low red corpuscle count," Max answered. "Look into a drop and see
what's going on. Use mine; I feel the same way he does." She took two
drops of Max's blood. The count was low, falling too fast.
Breathing is useless without the proper minimum of red corpuscles in
the blood. People below that minimum die of asphyxiation although their
lungs are full of pure air. The red corpuscle count was falling too
fast. The time she and Max had to work in was too short.
"Pump some more CO_{2} into the air system," Max said urgently over the
phone. "Get some into the men's end of the ward."
  *  *  *  *  *
She looked through the microscope at the live sample of blood. It was a
dark clear field and bright moving things spun and swirled through it,
but she could see nothing that did not belong there.
"Hal," Max called over the general speaker system, "cut the other
treatments, check for accelerating anemia. Treat it like monoxide
poisoning--CO_{2} and oxygen."
She reached into a cupboard under the work table, located two cylinders
of oxygen, cracked the valves and handed one to Max and one to the
assistant. Some of the bluish tint left the assistant's face as he
breathed and he went over to the patient with reawakened concern.
"Not breathing, Doc!"
Max was working at the desk, muttering equations of hemoglobin
catalysis.
"Len's gone, Doc," the assistant said more loudly.
"Artificial respiration and get him into a regeneration tank," said
June, not moving from the microscope. "Hurry! Hal will show you how.
The oxidation and mechanical heart action in the tank will keep him
going. Put anyone in a tank who seems to be dying. Get some women to
help you. Give them Hal's instructions."
The tanks were ordinarily used to suspend animation in a nutrient bath
during the regrowth of any diseased organ. It could preserve life in
an almost totally destroyed body during the usual disintegration and
regrowth treatments for cancer and old age, and it could encourage
healing as destruction continued ... but they could not prevent
ultimate death as long as the disease was not conquered.
The drop of blood in June's microscope was a great, dark field, and in
the foreground, brought to gargantuan solidity by the stereo effect,
drifted neat saucer shapes of red blood cells. They turned end for end,
floating by the humped misty mass of a leucocyte which was crawling on
the cover glass. There were not enough red corpuscles, and she felt
that they grew fewer as she watched.
She fixed her eye on one, not blinking in fear that she would miss what
might happen. It was a tidy red button, and it spun as it drifted, the
current moving it aside in a curve as it passed by the leucocyte.
Then, abruptly, the cell vanished.
June stared numbly at the place where it had been.
Behind her, Max was calling over the speaker system again: "Dr. Stark
speaking. Any technician who knows anything about the life tanks, start
bringing more out of storage and set them up. Emergency."
"We may need forty-seven," June said quietly.
"We may need forty-seven," Max repeated to the ship in general. His
voice did not falter. "Set them up along the corridor. Hook them in on
extension lines."
His voice filtered back from the empty floors above in a series of dim
echoes. What he had said meant that every man on board might be on the
point of heart stoppage.
  *  *  *  *  *
June looked blindly through the binocular microscope, trying to think.
Out of the corner of her eyes she could see that Max was wavering and
breathing more and more frequently of the pure, cold, burning oxygen of
the cylinders. In the microscope she could see that there were fewer
red cells left alive in the drop of his blood. The rate of fall was
accelerating.
She didn't have to glance at Max to know how he would look--skin pale,
black eyebrows and keen brown eyes slightly squinted in thought, a
faint ironical grin twisting the bluing lips. Intelligent, thin,
sensitive, his face was part of her mind. It was inconceivable that
Max could die. He couldn't die. He couldn't leave her alone.
She forced her mind back to the problem. All the men of the _Explorer_
were at the same point, wherever they were.
Moving to Max's desk, she spoke into the intercom system: "Bess, send
a couple of women to look through the ship, room by room, with a
stretcher. Make sure all the men are down here." She remembered Reno.
"Sparks, heard anything from Reno? Is he back?"
Sparks replied weakly after a lag. "The last I heard from Reno was a
call this morning. He was raving about mirrors, and Pat Mead's folks
not being real people, just carbon copies, and claiming he was crazy;
and I should send him the psychiatrist. I thought he was kidding. He
didn't call back."
"Thanks, Sparks." Reno was lost.
Max dialed and spoke to the bridge over the phone. "Are you okay up
there? Forget about engineering controls. Drop everything and head for
the tanks while you can still walk."
June went back to the work table and whispered into her own phone.
"Bess, send up a stretcher for Max. He looks pretty bad."
There had to be a solution. The life tanks could sustain life in a
damaged body, encouraging it to regrow more rapidly, but they merely
slowed death as long as the disease was not checked. The postponement
could not last long, for destruction could go on steadily in the tanks
until the nutritive solution would hold no life except the triumphant
microscopic killers that caused melting sickness.
There were very few red blood corpuscles in the microscope field now,
incredibly few. She tipped the microscope and they began to drift,
spinning slowly. A lone corpuscle floated through the center. She
watched it as the current swept it in an arc past the dim off-focus
bulk of the leucocyte. There was a sweep of motion and it vanished.
For a moment it meant nothing to her; then she lifted her head from
the microscope and looked around. Max sat at his desk, head in hand,
his rumpled short black hair sticking out between his fingers at odd
angles. A pencil and a pad scrawled with formulas lay on the desk
before him. She could see his concentration in the rigid set of his
shoulders. He was still thinking; he had not given up.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Max, I just saw a leucocyte grab a red blood corpuscle. It was
unbelievably fast."
"Leukemia," muttered Max without moving. "Galloping leukemia yet! That
comes under the heading of cancer. Well, that's part of the answer. It
might be all we need." He grinned feebly and reached for the speaker
set. "Anybody still on his feet in there?" he muttered into it, and
the question was amplified to a booming voice throughout the ship.
"Hal, are you still going? Look, Hal, change all the dials, change the
dials, set them to deep melt and regeneration. One week. This is like
leukemia. Got it? This is like leukemia."
June rose. It was time for her to take over the job. She leaned across
his desk and spoke into the speaker system. "Doctor Walton talking,"
she said. "This is to the women. Don't let any of the men work any
more; they'll kill themselves. See that they all go into the tanks
right away. Set the tank dials for deep regeneration. You can see how
from the ones that are set."
Two exhausted and frightened women clattered in the doorway with a
stretcher. Their hands were scratched and oily from helping to set up
tanks.
"That order includes you," she told Max sternly and caught him as he
swayed.
Max saw the stretcher bearers and struggled upright. "Ten more
minutes," he said clearly. "Might think of an idea. Something not right
in this setup. I have to figure how to prevent a relapse, how the thing
started."
He knew more bacteriology than she did; she had to help him think. She
motioned the bearers to wait, fixed a breathing mask for Max from a
cylinder of CO_{2} and the opened one of oxygen. Max went back to his
desk.
She walked up and down, trying to think, remembering the hamsters. The
melting sickness, it was called. Melting. She struggled with an impulse
to open a tank which held one of the men. She wanted to look in, see if
that would explain the name.
Melting Sickness....
Footsteps came and Pat Mead stood uncertainly in the doorway. Tall,
handsome, rugged, a pioneer. "Anything I can do?" he asked.
She barely looked at him. "You can stay out of our way. We're busy."
"I'd like to help," he said.
"Very funny." She was vicious, enjoying the whip of her words. "Every
man is dying because you're a carrier, and you want to help."
  *  *  *  *  *
He stood nervously clenching and unclenching his hands. "A guinea pig,
maybe. I'm immune. All the Meads are."
"Go away." God, why couldn't she think? What makes a Mead immune?
"Aw, let 'im alone," Max muttered. "Pat hasn't done anything." He went
waveringly to the microscope, took a tiny sliver from his finger,
suspended it in a slide and slipped it under the lens with detached
habitual dexterity. "Something funny going on," he said to June.
"Symptoms don't feel right."
After a moment he straightened and motioned for her to look.
"Leucocytes, phagocytes--" He was bewildered. "My own--"
She looked in, and then looked back at Pat in a growing wave of
horror. "They're not your own, Max!" she whispered.
Max rested a hand on the table to brace himself, put his eye to the
microscope, and looked again. June knew what he saw. Phagocytes,
leucocytes, attacking and devouring his tissues in a growing incredible
horde, multiplying insanely.
_Not his phagocytes! Pat Mead's!_ The Meads' evolved cells had learned
too much. They were contagious. And not Pat Mead's.... How much alike
_were_ the Meads?... Mead cells contagious from one to another, not
a disease attacking or being fought, but acting as normal leucocytes
in whatever body they were in! The leucocytes of tall, red-headed
people, finding no strangeness in the bloodstream of any of the tall,
red-headed people. No strangeness.... A toti-potent leucocyte finding
its way into cellular wombs.
The womblike life tanks. For the men of the _Explorer_, a week's cure
with deep melting to de-differentiate the leucocytes and turn them back
to normal tissue, then regrowth and reforming from the cells that were
there. From the cells that _were_ there. _From the cells that were
there...._
"Pat--"
"I know." Pat began to laugh, his face twisted with sudden
understanding. "I understand. I get it. I'm a contagious personality.
That's funny, isn't it?"
Max rose suddenly from the microscope and lurched toward him, fists
clenched. Pat caught him as he fell, and the bewildered stretcher
bearers carried him out to the tanks.
  *  *  *  *  *
For a week June tended the tanks. The other women volunteered to help,
but she refused. She said nothing, hoping her guess would not be true.
"Is everything all right?" Elsie asked her anxiously. "How is Jerry
coming along?" Elsie looked haggard and worn, like all the women, from
doing the work that the men had always done.
"He's fine," June said tonelessly, shutting tight the door of the tank
room. "They're all fine."
"That's good," Elsie said, but she looked more frightened than before.
June firmly locked the tank room door and the girl went away.
The other women had been listening, and now they wandered back to
their jobs, unsatisfied by June's answer, but not daring to ask for
the actual truth. They were there whenever June went into the tank
room, and they were still there--or relieved by others; June was
not sure--when she came out. And always some one of them asked the
unvarying question for all the others, and June gave the unvarying
answer. But she kept the key. No woman but herself knew what was going
on in the life tanks.
Then the day of completion came. June told no one of the hour. She
went into the room as on the other days, locked the door behind her,
and there was the nightmare again. This time it was reality and she
wandered down a path between long rows of coffinlike tanks, calling,
"Max! Max!" silently and looking into each one as it opened.
But each face she looked at was the same. Watching them dissolve and
regrow in the nutrient solution, she had only been able to guess at the
horror of what was happening. Now she knew.
They were all the same lean-boned, blond-skinned face, with a
pin-feather growth of reddish down on cheeks and scalp. All
horribly--and handsomely--the same.
A medical kit lay carelessly on the floor beside Max's tank. She stood
near the bag. "Max," she said, and found her throat closing. The canned
voice of the mechanical mocked her, speaking glibly about waking and
sitting up. "I'm sorry, Max...."
The tall man with rugged features and bright blue eyes sat up sleepily
and lifted an eyebrow at her, and ran his hand over his red-fuzzed head
in a gesture of bewilderment.
"What's the matter, June?" he asked drowsily.
She gripped his arm. "Max--"
He compared the relative size of his arm with her hand and said
wonderingly, "You shrank."
"I know, Max. I know."
He turned his head and looked at his arms and legs, pale blond arms
and legs with a down of red hair. He touched the thick left arm,
squeezed a pinch of hard flesh. "It isn't mine," he said, surprised.
"But I can feel it."
Watching his face was like watching a stranger mimicking and distorting
Max's expressions. Max in fear. Max trying to understand what had
happened to him, looking around at the other men sitting up in their
tanks. Max feeling the terror that was in herself and all the men as
they stared at themselves and their friends and saw what they had
become.
"We're all Pat Mead," he said harshly. "All the Meads are Pat Mead.
That's why he was surprised to see people who didn't look like himself."
"Yes, Max."
"Max," he repeated. "It's me, all right. The nervous system didn't
change." His new blue eyes held hers. "My love didn't, either. Did
yours? Did it, June?"
"No, Max." But she couldn't know yet. She had loved Max with the thin,
ironic face, the rumpled black hair and the twisted smile that never
really hid his quick sympathy. Now he was Pat Mead. Could he also be
Max? "Of course I still love you, darling."
He grinned. It was still the wry smile of Max, though fitting strangely
on the handsome new blond face. "Then it isn't so bad. It might even be
pretty good. I envied him this big, muscular body. If Pat or any of
these Meads so much as looks at you, I'm going to knock his block off.
Understand?"
  *  *  *  *  *
She laughed and couldn't stop. It wasn't that funny. But it was still
Max, trying to be unafraid, drawing on humor. Maybe the rest of the men
would also be their old selves, enough so the women would not feel that
their men were strangers.
Behind her, male voices spoke characteristically. She did not have
to turn to know which was which: "This is one way to keep a guy from
stealing your girl," that was Len Marlow; "I've got to write down all
my reactions," Hal Barton; "Now I can really work that hillside vein of
metal," St. Clair. Then others complaining, swearing, laughing bitterly
at the trick that had been played on them and their flirting, tempted
women. She knew who they were. Their women would know them apart, too.
"We'll go outside," Max said. "You and I. Maybe the shock won't be so
bad to the women after they see me." He paused. "You didn't tell them,
did you?"
"I couldn't. I wasn't sure. I--was hoping I was wrong."
She opened the door and closed it quickly. There was a small crowd on
the other side.
"Hello, Pat," Elsie said uncertainly, trying to look past them into the
tank room before the door shut.
"I'm not Pat, I'm Max," said the tall man with the blue eyes and the
fuzz-reddened skull. "Listen--"
"Good heavens, Pat, what happened to your hair?" Shelia asked.
"I'm Max," insisted the man with the handsome face and the sharp blue
eyes. "Don't you get it? I'm Max Stark. The melting sickness is Mead
cells. We caught them from Pat. They adapted us to Minos. They also
changed us all into Pat Mead."
The women stared at him, at each other. They shook their heads.
"They don't understand," June said. "I couldn't have if I hadn't seen
it happening, Max."
"It's Pat," said Shelia, dazedly stubborn. "He shaved off his hair.
It's some kind of joke."
Max shook her shoulders, glaring down at her face. "I'm Max. Max Stark.
They all look like me. Do you hear? It's funny, but it's not a joke.
Laugh for us, for God's sake!"
"It's too much," said June. "They'll have to see."
She opened the door and let them in. They hurried past her to the
tanks, looking at forty-six identical blond faces, beginning to call in
frightened voices:
"Jerry!"
"Harry!"
"Lee, where are you, sweetheart--"
June shut the door on the voices that were growing hysterical, the
women terrified and helpless, the men shouting to let the women know
who they were.
"It isn't easy," said Max, looking down at his own thick muscles. "But
you aren't changed and the other girls aren't. That helps."
Through the muffled noise and hysteria, a bell was ringing.
"It's the airlock," June said.
Peering in the viewplate were nine Meads from Alexandria. To all
appearances, eight of them were Pat Mead at various ages, from fifteen
to fifty, and the other was a handsome, leggy, red-headed girl who
could have been his sister.
Regretfully, they explained through the voice tube that they had walked
over from Alexandria to bring news that the plane pilot had contracted
melting sickness there and had died.
They wanted to come in.
  *  *  *  *  *
June and Max told them to wait and returned to the tank room. The
men were enjoying their new height and strength, and the women were
bewilderedly learning that they could tell one Pat Mead from another,
by voice, by gesture of face or hand. The panic was gone. In its place
was a dull acceptance of the fantastic situation.
Max called for attention. "There are nine Meads outside who want to
come in. They have different names, but they're all Pat Mead."
They frowned or looked blank, and George Barton asked, "Why didn't you
let them in? I don't see any problem."
"One of them," said Max soberly, "is a girl. _Patricia_ Mead. The girl
wants to come in."
There was a long silence while the implication settled to the fear
center of the women's minds. Shelia the beautiful felt it first. She
cried, "No! Please don't let her in!" There was real fright in her tone
and the women caught it quickly.
Elsie clung to Jerry, begging, "You don't want me to change, do you,
Jerry? You like me the way I am! Tell me you do!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The other girls backed away. It was illogical, but it was human. June
felt terror rising in herself. She held up her hand for quiet, and
presented the necessity to the group.
"Only half of us can leave Minos," she said. "The men cannot eat
ship food; they've been conditioned to this planet. We women can go,
but we would have to go without our men. We can't go outside without
contagion, and we can't spend the rest of our lives in quarantine
inside the ship. George Barton is right--there is no problem."
"But we'd be changed!" Shelia shrilled. "I don't want to become a Mead!
I don't want to be somebody else!"
She ran to the inner wall of the corridor. There was a brief
hesitation, and then, one by one, the women fled to that side, until
there were only Bess, June and four others left.
"See!" cried Shelia. "A vote! We can't let the girl in!"
No one spoke. To change, to be someone else--the idea was strange
and horrifying. The men stood uneasily glancing at each other, as if
looking into mirrors, and against the wall of the corridor the women
watched in fear and huddled together, staring at the men. One man in
forty-seven poses. One of them made a beseeching move toward Elsie and
she shrank away.
"No, Jerry! I won't let you change me!"
Max stirred restlessly, the ironic smile that made his new face his own
unconsciously twisting into a grimace of pity. "We men can't leave, and
you women can't stay," he said bluntly. "Why not let Patricia Mead in.
Get it over with!"
June took a small mirror from her belt pouch and studied her own face,
aware of Max talking forcefully, the men standing silent, the women
pleading. Her face ... her own face with its dark blue eyes, small
nose, long mobile lips ... the mind and the body are inseparable; the
shape of a face is part of the mind. She put the mirror back.
"I'd kill myself!" Shelia was sobbing. "I'd rather die!"
"You won't die," Max was saying. "Can't you see there's only one
solution--"
They were looking at Max. June stepped silently out of the tank room,
and then turned and went to the airlock. She opened the valves that
would let in Pat Mead's sister.
Beginning a thrilling New Serial of Interplanetary Life and Travel 
by Edward E. Smith, Ph.D._
_Author of "Skylark of Space" and "Skylark Three"_
Spacehounds of IPC
  _A good many of us, who are now certain beyond a doubt that space
  travel will forever remain in the realm of the impossible, probably
  would, if a rocket that were shot to the moon, for instance, did
  arrive, and perhaps return to give proof of its safe arrival on our
  satellite, accept the phenomenon in a perfectly blas, twentieth
  century manner. Dr. Smith, that phenomenal writer of classic
  scientific fiction, seems to have become so thoroughly convinced of
  the advent of interplanetary travel that it is difficult for the
  reader to feel, after finishing "Spacehounds of IPC," that travel
  in the great spaces is not already an established fact. Dr. Smith,
  as a professional chemist, is kept fairly busy. As a writer, he is
  satisfied with nothing less than perfection. For that reason, a
  masterpiece from his pen has become almost an annual event. We know
  you will like "Spacehounds" even better than the "Skylark" series._
Illustrated by WESSO
CHAPTER I
The IPV _Arcturus_ Sets Out for Mars
A narrow football of steel, the Interplanetary Vessel _Arcturus_ stood
upright in her berth in the dock like an egg in its cup. A hundred feet
across and a hundred and seventy feet deep was that gigantic bowl, its
walls supported by the structural steel and concrete of the dock and
lined with hard-packed bumper-layers of hemp and fibre. High into the
air extended the upper half of the ship of space--a sullen gray expanse
of fifty-inch hardened steel armor, curving smoothly upward to a needle
prow. Countless hundred of fine vertical scratches marred every inch
of her surface, and here and there the stubborn metal was grooved and
scored to a depth of inches--each scratch and score the record of an
attempt of some wandering cosmic body to argue the right-of-way with
the stupendous mass of that man-made cruiser of the void.
A burly young man made his way through the throng about the entrance,
nodded unconcernedly to the gatekeeper, and joined the stream of
passengers flowing through the triple doors of the double air-lock
and down a corridor to the center of the vessel. However, instead of
entering one of the elevators which were whisking the passengers up to
their staterooms in the upper half of the enormous football, he in some
way caused an opening to appear in an apparently blank steel wall and
stepped through it into the control room.
"Hi, Breck!" the burly one called, as he strode up to the instrument-desk
of the chief pilot and tossed his bag carelessly into a corner. "Behold
your computer in the flesh! What's all this howl and fuss about poor
computation?"
"Hello, Steve!" The chief pilot smiled as he shook hands cordially.
"Glad to see you again--but don't try to kid the old man. I'm simple
enough to believe almost anything, but some things just aren't being
done. We have been yelling, and yelling hard, for trained computers
ever since they started riding us about every one centimeter change in
acceleration, but I know that you're no more an I-P computer than I am
a Digger Indian. They don't shoot sparrows with coast-defense guns!"
[Illustration]
"Thanks for the compliment, Breck, but I'm your computer for this trip,
anyway. Newton, the good old egg, knows what you fellows are up against
and is going to do something about it, if he has to lick all the rest of
the directors to do it. He knew that I was loose for a couple of weeks
and asked me to come along this trip to see what I could see. I'm to
check the observatory data--they don't know I'm aboard--take the peaks
and valleys off your acceleration curve, if possible, and report to
Newton just what I find out and what I think should be done about it.
How early am I?" While the newcomer was talking, he had stripped the
covers from a precise scale model of the solar system and from a large
and complicated calculating machine and had set to work without a wasted
motion or instant--scaling off upon the model the positions of the
various check-stations and setting up long and involved integrals and
equations upon the calculator.
The older man studied the broad back of the younger, bent over his
computations, and a tender, almost fatherly smile came over his careworn
face as he replied:
"Early? You? Just like you always were--plus fifteen seconds on the
deadline. The final dope is due right now." He plugged the automatic
recorder and speaker into a circuit marked "Observatory," waited until
a tiny light above the plug flashed green, and spoke.
"IPV _Arcturus_; Breckenridge, Chief Pilot; trip number forty-three
twenty-nine. Ready for final supplementary route and flight data, Tellus
to Mars."
"Meteoric swarms still too numerous for safe travel along the scheduled
route," came promptly from the speaker. "You must stay further away from
the plane of the ecliptic. The ether will be clear for you along route
E2-P6-W41-K3-R19-S7-M14. You will hold a constant acceleration of 981.27
centimeters between initial and final check stations. Your take-off
will be practically unobstructed, but you will have to use the utmost
caution in landing upon Mars, because in order to avoid a weightless
detour and a loss of thirty-one minutes, you must pass very close
to both the Martian satellites. To do so safely you must pass the
last meteorological station, M14, on schedule time plus or minus five
seconds, at scheduled velocity plus or minus ten meters, with exactly
the given negative acceleration of 981.27 centimeters, and exactly upon
the pilot ray M14 will have set for you."
"All x." Breckenridge studied his triplex chronometer intently, then
unplugged and glanced around the control room, in various parts of which
half a dozen assistants were loafing at their stations.
"Control and power check-out--Hipe!" he barked. "Driving converters and
projectors!"
The first assistant scanned his meters narrowly as he swung a
multi-point switch in a flashing arc. "Converter efficiency 100,
projector reactivity 100; on each of numbers one to forty-five
inclusive. All x."
"Dirigible projectors!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Two more gleaming switches leaped from point to point. "Converter
efficiency 100, projector reactivity 100, dirigibility 100, on each of
numbers one to thirty-two, inclusive, of upper band; and numbers one to
thirty-two, inclusive, of lower band. All x."
"Gyroscopes!"
"35,000. Drivers in equilibrium at ten degrees plus. All x."
"Upper lights and lookout plates!"
The second assistant was galvanized into activity, and upon a screen
before him there appeared a view as though he were looking directly
upward from the prow of the great vessel. The air above them was full of
aircraft of all shapes and sizes, and occasionally the image of one of
that flying horde flared into violet splendor upon the screen as it was
caught in the mighty, roving beam of one of the twelve ultra-light
projectors under test.
"Upper lights and lookout plates--all x," the second assistant reported,
and other assistants came to attention as the check-out went on.
"Lower lights and lookout plates!"
"All x," was the report, after each of the twelve ultra-lights of the
stern had swung around in its supporting brackets, illuminating every
recess of the dark depths of the bottom well of the berth and throwing
the picture upon another screen in lurid violet relief.
"Lateral and vertical detectors!"
"Laterals XP2710--all x. Verticals AJ4290--all x."
"Receptors!"
"15,270 kilofranks--all x."
"Accumulators!"
"700,000 kilofrank-hours--all x."
Having thus checked and tested every function of his department,
Breckenridge plugged into "Captain," and when the green light went on:
"Chief pilot check-out--all x," he reported briefly.
"All x," acknowledged the speaker, and the chief pilot unplugged.
Fifteen minutes remained, during which time one department head after
another would report to the captain of the liner that everything in his
charge was ready for the stupendous flight.
"All x, Steve?" Breckenridge turned to the computer. "How do you check
acceleration and power with the observatory?"
"Not so good, old bean," the younger man frowned in thought. "They
figure like astronomers, not navigators. They've made no allowances for
anything, not even the reversal--and I figure four thousands for that
and for minor detours. Then there's check station errors...."
"Check-station errors! Why, they're always right--that's what they're
for!"
"Don't fool yourself--they've got troubles of their own, the same as
anybody else. In fact, from a study of the charts of the last few weeks,
I'm pretty sure that E2 is at least four thousand kilometers this side
of where he thinks he is, that W41 is ten or twelve thousand beyond his
station, and that they've both got a lateral displacement that's simply
fierce. I'm going to check up, and argue with them about it as we pass.
Then there's another thing--they figure to only two places, and we've
got to have the third place almost solid if we expect to get a smooth
curve. A hundredth of a centimeter of acceleration means a lot on a long
trip when they're holding us as close as they are doing now. We'll ride
this trip on 981.286 centimeters--with our scheduled mass, that means
thirty six points of four seven kilofranks _plus_ equilibrium power. All
set to go," the computer stated, as he changed, by fractions of arc, the
course-plotters of the automatic integrating goniometer.
"You're the doctor--but I'm glad it's you that'll have to explain to the
observatory," and Breckenridge set his exceedingly delicate excess power
potentiometer exactly upon the indicated figure. "Well, we've got a few
minutes left for a chin-chin before we lift her off."
"What's all this commotion about? Dish out the low-down."
"Well, it's like this, Steve. We pilots are having one sweet
time--we're being growled at on every trip. The management squawks if
we're thirty seconds plus or minus at the terminals, and the passenger
department squalls if we change acceleration five centimeters total en
route--claims it upsets the dainty customers and loses business for
the road. They're tightening up on us all the time. A couple of years
ago, you remember, it didn't make any difference what we did with the
acceleration as long as we checked in somewhere near zero time--we used
to spin 'em dizzy when we reversed at the half-way station--but that
kind of stuff doesn't go any more. We've got to hold the acceleration
constant and close to normal, got to hold our schedule on zero, _plus_
or _minus_ ten seconds, and yet we've got to make any detours they
tell us to, such as this seven-million kilometer thing they handed
us just now. To make things worse, we've got to take orders at every
check-station, and yet _we_ get the blame for everything that happens
as a consequence of obeying those orders! Of course, I know as well
as you do that it's rotten technique to change acceleration at every
check-station; but we've told 'em over and over that we can't do any
better until they put a real computer on every ship and tell the
check-stations to report meteorites and other obstructions to us and
then to let us alone. So you'd better recommend us some computers!"
"You're getting rotten computation, that's a sure thing, and I don't
blame you pilots for yelling, but I don't believe that you've got the
right answer. I can't help but think that the astronomers are lying down
on the job. They are so sure that you pilots are to blame that it hasn't
occurred to them to check up on themselves very carefully. However,
we'll know pretty quick, and then we'll take steps."
"I hope so--but say, Steve, I'm worried about using that much plus
equilibrium power. Remember, we've got to hit M14 in absolutely good
shape, or plenty heads will drop."
"I'll say they will. I know just how the passengers will howl if we
hold them weightless for half an hour, waiting for those two moons to get
out of the way, and I know just what the manager will do if we check in
minus thirty-one minutes. Wow! He'll swell up and bust, sure. But don't
worry, Breck--if we don't check in all right, anybody can have my head
that wants it, and I'm taking full responsibility, you know."
"You're welcome to it." Breckenridge shrugged and turned the
conversation into a lighter vein. "Speaking of weightlessness,
it's funny how many weight-fiends there are in the world, isn't
it? You'd think the passengers would enjoy a little weightlessness
occasionally--especially the fat ones--but they don't. But say, while
I think of it, how come you were here and loose to make this check-up?
I thought you were out with the other two of the Big Three, solving
all the mysteries of the Universe?"
"Had to stay in this last trip--been doing some work on the ether,
force-field theory, and other advanced stuff that I had to go to Mars
and Venus to get. Just got back last week. As for solving mysteries,
laugh while you can, old hyena. You and a lot of other dim bulbs think
that Roeser's Rays are the last word--that there's nothing left to
discover--are going to get jarred loose from your hinges one of these
days. When I came in nine months ago they were hot on the trail of
something big, and I'll bet they bring it in...."
Out upon the dock an insistent siren blared a crescendo and diminuendo
blast of sound, and two minutes remained. In every stateroom and in
every lounge and saloon speakers sounded a warning:
"For a short time, while we are pulling clear of the gravitational field
of the Earth, walking will be somewhat difficult, as everything on board
will apparently increase in weight by about one-fifth of its present
amount. Please remain seated, or move about with caution. In about an
hour weight will gradually return to normal. We start in one minute."
"Hipe!" barked the chief pilot as a flaring purple light sprang into
being upon his board, and the assistants came to attention at their
stations. "Seconds! Four! Three! Two! One! LIFT!" He touched a
button and a set of plunger switches drove home, releasing into the
forty-five enormous driving projectors the equilibrium power--the
fifteen-thousand-and-odd kilofranks of energy that exactly
counterbalanced the pull of gravity upon the mass of the cruiser.
Simultaneously there was added from the potentiometer, already set
to the exact figure given by the computer, the _plus_-equilibrium
power--which would not be changed throughout the journey if the ideal
acceleration curve were to be registered upon the recorders--and the
immense mass of the cruiser of the void wafted vertically upward at a
low and constant velocity. The bellowing, shrieking siren had cleared
the air magically of the swarm of aircraft in her path, and quietly,
calmly, majestically, the _Arcturus_ floated upward.
  *  *  *  *  *
Breckenridge, sixty seconds after the initial lift, actuated the system
of magnetic relays which would gradually cut in the precisely measured
"starting power," which it would be necessary to employ for sixty-nine
minutes--for, without the acceleration given by this additional power,
they would lose many precious hours of time in covering merely the
few thousands of miles during which Earth's attraction would operate
powerfully against their progress.
Faster and faster the great cruiser shot upward as more and more of the
starting power was released, and heavier and heavier the passengers
felt themselves become. Soon the full calculated power was on and the
acceleration became constant. Weight no longer increased, but remained
constant at a value of plus twenty three and six-tenths percent. For a
few moments there had been uneasy stomachs among the passengers--perhaps
a few of the first-trippers had been made ill--but it was not much worse
than riding in a high-speed elevator, particularly since there was no
change from positive to negative acceleration such as is experienced in
express elevators.
The computer, his calculations complete, watched the pilot with
interest, for, accustomed as he was to traversing the depths of space,
there was a never-failing thrill to his scientific mind in the delicacy
and precision of the work which Breckenridge was doing--work which could
be done only by a man who had had long training in the profession and
who was possessed of instantaneous nervous reaction and of the highest
degree of manual dexterity and control. Under his right and left hands
were the double-series potentiometers actuating the variable-speed
drives of the flight-angle directors in the hour and declination ranges;
before his eyes was the finely marked micrometer screen upon which the
guiding goniometer threw its needle-point of light; powerful optical
systems of prisms and lenses revealed to his sight the director-angles,
down to fractional seconds of arc. It was the task of the chief pilot
to hold the screened image of the cross-hairs of the two directors in
such position relative to the ever-moving point of light as to hold the
mighty vessel precisely upon its course, in spite of the complex system
of forces acting upon it.
For almost an hour Breckenridge sat motionless, his eyes flashing from
micrometer screen to signal panel, his sensitive fingers moving the
potentiometers through minute arcs because of what he saw upon the
screen and in instantaneous response to the flashing, multi-colored
lights and tinkling signals of his board. Finally, far from earth, the
moon's attraction and other perturbing forces comparatively slight, the
signals no longer sounded and the point of light ceased its irregular
motion, becoming almost stationary. The chief pilot brought both
cross-hairs directly upon the brilliant point, which for some time they
had been approaching more and more nearly, adjusted the photo-cells
and amplifiers which would hold them immovably upon it, and at the
calculated second of time, cut out the starting power by means of
another set of automatically timed relays. When only the regular driving
power was left, and the acceleration had been checked and found to be
exactly the designated value of 981.286 centimeters, he stood up and
heaved a profound sigh of relief.
"Well, Steve, that's over with--we're on our way. I'm always glad when
this part of it is done."
"It's a ticklish job, no fooling--even for an expert," the mathematician
agreed. "No wonder the astronomers think you birds are the ones who are
gumming up their dope. Well, it's about time to plug in on E2. Here's
where the fireworks start!" He closed the connections which transferred
the central portion of the upper lookout screen to a small micrometer
screen at Breckenridge's desk and plugged it into the first
check-station. Instantly a point of red light, surrounded by a vivid
orange circle, appeared upon the screen, low down and to the left of
center, and the timing galvanometer showed a wide positive deflection.
"Hashed again!" growled Breckenridge. "I must be losing my grip,
I guess. I put everything I had on that sight, and missed it ten
divisions. I think I'll turn in my badge--I've cocked our perfect curve
already, before we got to the first check-station!" His hands moved
toward the controls, to correct their course and acceleration.
"As you were--hold everything! Lay off those controls!" snapped the
computer. "There's something screwy, just as I thought--and it isn't
you, either. I'm no pilot, of course, but I do know good compensation
when I see it, and if you weren't compensating that point I never saw it
done. Besides, with your skill and my figures I know darn well that we
aren't off more than a tenth of one division. He's cuckoo! Don't call
him--let him start it, and refer him to me."
"All x--I'll be only too glad to pass the buck. But I still think,
Steve, that you're playing with dynamite. Who ever heard of an
astronomer being wrong?"
"You'd be surprised," grinned the physicist, "Since this fuss has
just started, nobody has tried to find out whether they were wrong
or not...."
"IPV _Arcturus_, attention!" came from the speaker curtly.
"IPV _Arcturus_, Breckenridge," from the chief pilot.
"You have been on my ray almost a minute. Why are you not correcting
course and acceleration?"
"Doctor Stevens is computing us and has full control of course and
acceleration," replied Breckenridge. "He will answer you."
"I am changing neither course nor acceleration because you are not
in position," declared Stevens, crisply, "Please give me your present
supposed location, and your latest precision goniometer bearings on the
sun, the moon, Mars, Venus, and your Tellurian reference limb, with
exact time of observations, gyroscope zero-planes, and goniometer
factors!"
"Correct at once or I shall report you to the Observatory," E2 answered
loftily, paying no attention to the demand for proof of position.
"Be sure you do that, guy--and while you're at it report that your
station hasn't taken a precision bearing in a month. Report that you've
been muddling along on radio loop bearings, and that you don't know
where you are, within seven thousand kilometers. And speaking of
reporting--I know already that a lot of you astronomical guessers
have only the faintest possible idea of where you really are, _plus_,
_minus_, or lateral; and if you don't get yourselves straightened out
before we get to W41, I'm going to make a report on my own account that
will jar some of you birds loose from your upper teeth!" He unplugged
with a vicious jerk, and turned to the pilot with a grin.
"Guess that'll hold him for a while, won't it?"
"He'll report us, sure," remonstrated Breckenridge. The older man was
plainly ill at ease at this open defiance of the supposedly infallible
check-stations.
"Not that baby," returned the computer confidently. "I'll bet you a
small farm against a plugged nickel that right now he's working his
goniometer so hard that it's pivots are getting hot. He'll sneak back
into position as soon as he can calculate his results, and pretend he's
always been there."
"The others will be all right, then, probably, by the time we get to
them?"
"Gosh, no--you're unusually dumb today, Breck. He won't tell anybody
anything--he doesn't want to be the only goat, does he?"
"Oh, I see. How could you dope this out, with only the recorder charts?"
"Because I know the kind of stuff you pilots are--and those humps are
altogether too big to be accounted for by anything I know about you.
Another thing--the next station, P6, I think is keeping himself all x.
If so, when you corrected for E2, which was wrong, it'd throw you all
off on P6, which was right, and so on--a bad hump at almost every
check-station. See?"
  *  *  *  *  *
True to prediction, the pilot ray of P6 came in almost upon the exact
center of the micrometer screen, and Breckenridge smiled in relief as he
began really to enjoy the trip.
"How do we check on chronometers?" asked P6 when Stevens had been
introduced. "By my time you seem to be about two and a half seconds
_plus_?"
"All x--two points four seconds plus--we're riding on 981.286
centimeters, to allow for the reversal and for minor detours. Bye."
"All this may have been coincidence, Breck, but we'll find out pretty
quick now," the computer remarked when the flying vessel was nearing
the third check-station. "Unless I'm all out of control we'll check in
almost fourteen seconds minus on W41, and we may not even find him on
the center block of the screen."
When he plugged in W41 was on the block, but was in the extreme upper
right corner. They checked in thirteen and eight-tenths seconds minus on
the station, and a fiery dialogue ensued when the computer questioned
the accuracy of the location of the station and refused point-blank to
correct his course.
"Well, Breck, old onion, that tears it," Stevens declared as he
unplugged. "No use going any further on these bum reference points.
I'm going to report to Newton--he'll rock the Observatory on its
foundations!" He plugged into the telegraph room. "Have you got a free
high-power wave?... Please put me on Newton, in the main office."
Moving lights flashed and flickered for an instant upon the communicator
screen, settling down into a white glow which soon resolved itself into
the likeness of a keen-eyed, gray-haired man, seated at his desk in the
remote office of the Interplanetary Corporation. Newton smiled as he
recognized the likeness of Stevens upon his own screen, and greeted him
cordially.
"Have you started your investigation, Doctor Stevens?"
"Started it? I've finished it!" and Stevens tersely reported what he
had learned, concluding: "So you see, you don't need special computers
on these ships any more than a hen needs teeth. You've got all the
computers you need, in the observatories--all you've got to do is make
them work at their trade."
"The piloting was all x, then?"
"Absolutely--our curve so far is exactly flat ever since we cut
off the starting power. Of course, all the pilots can't be as good as
Breckenridge, but give them good computation and good check points and
you shouldn't get any humps higher than about half a centimeter."
"They'll get both, from now on," the director assured him. "Thanks. If
your work for the trip is done, you might show my little girl, Nadia,
around the _Arcturus_. She's never been out before, and will be
interested. Would you mind?"
"Glad to, Mr. Newton--I'll be a regular uncle to her."
"Thanks again, Operator, I'll speak to Captain King, please."
"Pipe down that guff, you unlicked cub, or I'll crown you with a
proof-bar!" the chief pilot growled, as soon as Stevens had unplugged.
"You and who else?" retorted the computer, cheerfully. "Pipe down
yourself, guy--if you weren't so darn dumb and didn't have such a
complex, you'd know that you're the crack pilot of the outfit and
wouldn't care who else knew it." Stevens carefully covered and put away
the calculating machine and other apparatus he had been using and turned
again to the pilot.
"I didn't know Newton had any kids, especially little ones, or I'd have
got acquainted with them long ago. Of course I don't know him very well,
since I never was around the office much, but the old tiger goes over
big with me."
"Hm--m. Think you'll enjoy playing nursemaid all the rest of the trip?"
Breckenridge asked caustically, but with an enigmatic smile.
"Think so? I _know_ so!" replied Stevens, positively. "I always did
like kids, and they always did like me--we fall for each other like ten
thousand bricks falling down a well. Why, a kid--_any_ kid--and I team
up just like grace and poise.... What's gnawing on you anyway, to make
you turn Cheshire cat all of a sudden? By the looks of that grin I'd
say you had swallowed a canary of mine some way or other; but darned if
I know that I've lost any," and he stared at his friend suspiciously.
"To borrow your own phrase, Steve, 'You'd be surprised,'" and
Breckenridge, though making no effort to conceal his amusement, would
say no more.
In a few minutes the door opened, and through it there stepped a
grizzled four-striper. Almost hidden behind his massive form there was
a girl, who ran up to Breckenridge and seized both his hands, her eyes
sparkling.
"Hi, Breckie, you old darling! I knew that if we both kept after
him long enough Dad would let me ride with you sometime. Isn't this
_gorgeous_?"
Stevens was glad indeed that the girl's enthusiastic greeting of the
pilot was giving him time to recover from his shock, for Director
Newton's "little girl, Nadia" was not precisely what he had led himself
to expect. Little she might be, particularly when compared with the
giant frame of Captain King, or with Steve's own five-feet-eleven of
stature and the hundred and ninety pounds of rawhide and whalebone that
was his body, but child she certainly was not. Her thick, fair hair,
cut in the square bob that was the mode of the moment, indicated that
Nature had intended her to be a creamy blonde, but as she turned to be
introduced to him, Stevens received another surprise--for she was one
of those rare, but exceedingly attractive beings, a natural blonde with
brown eyes and black eyebrows. Sun and wind had tanned her satin skin
to a smooth and even shade of brown, and every movement of her lithe and
supple body bespoke to the discerning mind a rigidly-trained physique.
"Doctor Stevens, you haven't met Miss Newton, I hear," the captain
introduced them informally. "All the officers who are not actually tied
down at their posts are anxious to do the honors of the vessel, but as
I have received direct orders from the owners, I am turning her over to
you--you are to show her around."
"Thanks, Captain, I won't mutiny a bit against such an order. I'm mighty
glad to know you, Miss Newton."
"I've heard a lot about you, Doctor. Dad and Breckie here are always
talking about the Big Three--what you have done and what you are going
to do. I want to meet Doctor Brandon and Doctor Westfall, too," and her
hand met his in a firm and friendly clasp. She turned to the captain,
and Stevens, noticing that the pilot, with a quizzical expression, was
about to say something, silenced him with a fierce aside.
"Clam it, ape, or I'll climb up you like a squirrel!" he hissed, and the
grinning Breckenridge nodded assent to this demand for silence
concerning children and nursemaids.
"Since you've never been out, Miss Newton, you'll want to see the whole
works," Stevens addressed the girl. "Where do you want to begin? Shall
we start at the top and work down?"
"All right with me," she agreed, and fell into step beside him. She was
dressed in dove-gray from head to foot--toque, blouse, breeches, heavy
stockings, and shoes were of the one shade of smooth, lustrous silk; and
as they strolled together down the passage-way, the effortless ease and
perfect poise of her carriage called aloud to every hard-schooled fibre
of his own highly-trained being.
"We're a lot alike you and I--do you know it?" he asked, abruptly and
unconventionally.
"Yes, I've felt it, too," she replied frankly, and studied him without
affectation. "It has just come to me what it is. We're both in fine
condition and in hard training. You're an athlete of some kind, and I'm
sure you're a star--I ought to recognize you, but I'm ashamed to say I
don't. What do you do?"
"Swim."
"Oh, of course--Stevens, the great Olympic high and fancy diver! I would
_never_ have connected our own Doctor Stevens, the eminent mathematical
physicist, with the King of the Springboard. Say, ever since I quit
being afraid of the water I've had a yen to do that two-and-a-half twist
of yours, but I never met anybody who knew it well enough to teach it
to me, and I've almost broken my back forty times trying to learn it
alone!"
"I've got you, now, too--American and British Womens' golf champion.
Shake!" and the two shook hands vigorously, in mutual congratulation.
"Tell you what--I'll give you some pointers on diving, and you can show
me how to make a golf ball behave. Next to Norman Brandon, I've got
the most vicious hook in captivity--and Norm can't help himself. He's
left-handed, you know, and, being a southpaw, he's naturally wild. He
slices all his woods and hooks all his irons. I'm consistent, anyway--I
hook everything, even my putts."
"It's a bargain! What do you shoot?"
"Pretty dubby. Usually in the middle eighties--none of us play much,
being out in space most of the time, you know--sometimes, when my hook
is going particularly well, I go up into the nineties."
"We'll lick that hook," she promised, as they entered an elevator and
were borne upward, toward the prow of the great interplanetary cruiser.
CHAPTER II
----But Does Not Arrive
"All out--we climb the rest of the way on foot," Stevens told his
companion, as the elevator stopped at the uppermost passenger floor.
They walked across the small circular hall and the guard on duty came
to attention and saluted as they approached him.
"I have orders to pass you and Miss Newton, sir. Do you know all the
combinations?"
"I know this good old tub better than the men that built her--I helped
calculate her," Stevens replied, as he stepped up to an apparently blank
wall of steel and deftly manipulated an almost invisible dial set flush
with its surface. "This is to keep the passengers where they belong," he
explained, as a section of the wall swung backward in a short arc and
slid smoothly aside. "We will now proceed to see what makes it tick."
Ladder after ladder of steel they climbed, and bulkhead after bulkhead
opened at Stevens's knowing touch. At each floor the mathematician
explained to the girl the operation of the machinery there automatically
at work--devices for heating and cooling, devices for circulating,
maintaining, and purifying the air and the water--in short, all the
complex mechanism necessary for the comfort and convenience of the human
cargo of the liner.
Soon they entered the conical top compartment, a room scarcely fifteen
feet in diameter, tapering sharply upward to a hollow point some
twenty feet above them. The true shape of the room, however, was not
immediately apparent, because of the enormous latticed beams and
girders which braced the walls in every direction. The air glowed
with the violet light of the twelve great ultra-light projectors, like
searchlights with three-foot lenses, which lined the wall. The floor
beneath their feet was not a level steel platform, but seemed to be
composed of many lenticular sections of dull blue alloy.
"We are standing upon the upper lookout lenses, aren't we?" asked the
girl. "Is that perfectly all right?"
"Sure. They're so hard that nothing can scratch them, and of course
Roeser's Rays go right through our bodies, or any ordinary substance,
like a bullet through a hole in a Swiss cheese. Even those lenses
wouldn't deflect them if they weren't solid fields of force."
As he spoke, one of the ultra-lights flashed around in a short, quick
arc, and the girl saw that instead of the fierce glare she had expected,
it emitted only a soft violet light. Nevertheless she dodged
involuntarily and Stevens touched her arm reassuringly.
"All x, Miss Newton--they're as harmless as mice. They hardly ever have
to swing past the vertical, and even if one shines right through you
can look it right in the eye as long as you want to--it can't hurt you
a bit."
"No ultra-violet at all?"
"None whatever. Just a color--one of the many remaining crudities of our
ultra-light vision. A lot of good men are studying this thing of direct
vision, though, and it won't be long before we have a system that will
really work."
"I think it's all perfectly wonderful!" she breathed. "Just think of
traveling in comfort through empty space, and of actually seeing through
seamless steel walls, without even a sign of a window! How can such
things be possible?"
"I'll have to go pretty well back," he warned, "and any adequate
explanation is bound to be fairly deep wading in spots. How technical
can you stand it?"
"I can go down with you middling deep--I took a lot of general science,
and physics through advanced mechanics. Of course, I didn't get into any
such highly specialized stuff as sub-electronics or Roeser's Rays, but
if you start drowning me, I'll yell."
"That's fine--you can get the idea all x, with that to go on. Let's sit
down here on this girder. Roeser didn't do it all, by any means, even
though he got credit for it--he merely helped the Martians do it. The
whole thing started, of course, when Goddard shot his first rocket to
the moon, and was intensified when Roeser so perfected his short waves
that signals were exchanged with Mars--signals that neither side could
make any sense out of. Goddard's pupils and followers made bigger and
better rockets, and finally got one that could land safely upon Mars.
Roeser, who was a mighty keen bird, was one of the first voyagers, and
he didn't come back--he stayed there, living in a space-suit for three
or four years, and got a brand-new education. Martian science always
was hot, you know, but they were impractical. They were desperately
hard up for water and air, and while they had a lot of wonderful
ideas and theories, they couldn't overcome the practical technical
difficulties in the way of making their ideas work. Now putting other
peoples' ideas to work was Roeser's long suit--don't think that I'm
belittling Roeser at all, either, for he was a brave and far-sighted
man, was no mean scientist, and was certainly one of the best organizers
and synchronizers the world has ever known--and since Martian and
Tellurian science complemented each other, so that one filled in the
gaps of the other, it wasn't long until fleets of space-freighters were
bringing in air and water from Venus, which had more of both than she
needed or wanted.
"Having done all he could for the Martians and having learned most of
the stuff he wanted to know, Roeser came back to Tellus and organized
Interplanetary, with scientists and engineers on all three planets,
and set to work to improve the whole system, for the vessels they used
then were dangerous--regular mankillers, in fact. At about this same
time Roeser and the Interplanetary Corporation had a big part in the
unification of the world into one nation, so that wars could no longer
interfere with progress."
  *  *  *  *  *
"With this introduction I can get down to fundamentals. Molecules are
particles of the first order, and vibrations of the first order include
sound, light, heat, electricity, radio, and so on. Second order,
atoms--extremely short vibrations, such as hard X-rays. Third order,
electrons and protons, with their accompanying Millikan, or cosmic,
rays. Fourth order, sub-electrons and sub-protons. These, in the
material aspect, are supposed to be the particles of the fourth order,
and in the energy aspect they are known as Roeser's Rays. That is, these
fourth-order rays and particles seem to partake of the nature of both
energy and matter. Following me?"
"Right behind you," she assured him. She had been listening intently,
her wide-spaced brown eyes fastened upon his face.
"Since these Roeser's Rays, or particles or rays of the fourth order,
seem to be both matter and energy, and since the rays can be converted
into what is supposed to be the particles, they have been thought to be
the things from which both electrons and protons were built. Therefore,
everybody except Norman Brandon has supposed them the ultimate units of
creation, so that it would be useless to try to go any further...."
"Why, we were taught that they _are_ the ultimate units!" she protested.
"I know you were--but we really don't know anything, except what we
have learned empirically, even about our driving forces. What is called
the fourth-order particle is absolutely unknown, since nobody has been
able to detect it, to say nothing of determining its velocity or other
properties. It has been assumed to have the velocity of light only
because that hypothesis does not conflict with observational data. I'm
going to give you the generally accepted idea, since we have nothing
definite to offer in its place, but I warn you that that idea is very
probably wrong. There's a lot of deep stuff down there hasn't been dug
up yet. In fact, Brandon thinks that the product of conversion isn't
what we think it is, at all--that the actual fundamental unit and the
primary mechanism of the transformation lie somewhere below the fourth
order, and possibly even below the level of the ether--but we haven't
been able to find a point of attack yet that will let us get in
anywhere. However, I'm getting 'way ahead of our subject. To get back to
it, energy can be converted into something that acts like matter through
Roeser's Rays, and that is the empirical fact underlying the drive of
our space-ships, as well as that of almost all other vehicles on all
three planets. Power is generated by the great waterfalls of Tellus and
Venus--water's mighty scarce on Mars, of course, so most of our plants
there use fuel--and is transmitted on light beams, by means of powerful
fields of force to the receptors, wherever they may be. The individual
transmitting fields and receptors are really simply matched-frequency
units, each matching the electrical characteristics of some particular
and unique beam of force. This beam is composed of Roeser's Rays, in
their energy aspect. It took a long time to work out this tight-beam
transmission of power, but it was fairly simple after they got it."
He took out a voluminous notebook, at the sight of which Nadia smiled.
"A computer might forget to dress, but you'd never catch one without a
full magazine pencil and a lot of blank paper," he grinned in reply and
went on, writing as he talked.
"For any given frequency, _f_, and phase angle, _theta_, you integrate,
between limits zero and _pi_ divided by two, sine theta d...."
"Hold it--I'm sinking!" Nadia exclaimed. "I don't integrate at all
unless it is absolutely necessary. As long as you stick to general
science, I'm right on your heels, but please lay off of integrations
and all that--most especially stay away from those terrible electrical
integrations. I always did think that they were the most poisonous kind
known. I want only a general idea--that's all that I can understand,
anyway."
"Sure, I forgot--guess I was getting in deeper than is necessary,
especially since this whole thing of beam transmission is pretty crude
yet and is bound to change a lot before long. There is so much loss
that when we get more than a few hundred million kilometers away from
a power-plant we lose reception entirely. But to get going again,
the receptors receive the beam and from them the power is sent to the
accumulators, where it is stored. These accumulators are an outgrowth
of the storage battery. The theory of the accumulator is...."
"Lay off the theory, please!" the listener interrupted. "I understand
perfectly without it. Energy is stored in the accumulators--you put it
in and take it out. That's all that is necessary."
  *  *  *  *  *
"I'd like to give you some of the theory--but, after all, it wouldn't
add much to your understanding of the working of things, and it might
mix you up, as some of it is pretty deep stuff. Then, too, it would
take a lot of time, and the rest of your friends would squawk if I
kept you here indefinitely. From the accumulators, then, the power
is fed to the converters, each of which is backed by a projector.
The converters simply change the aspect of the rays, from the
energy aspect to the material aspect. As soon as this is done, the
highly-charged particles--or whatever they are--thus formed are
repelled by the terrific stationary force maintained in the projector
backing the converter. Each particle departs with a velocity supposed
to be that of light, and the recoil upon the projector drives the
vessel, or car, or whatever it is attached to. Still with me?"
"Struggling a little, but my nose is still above the surface. These
particles, being so infinitesimally small that they cannot even be
detected, go right through any substance without any effect--they are
not even harmful."
"Exactly. Now we are in position to go ahead with the lights, detectors,
and so on. The energy aspect of the rays you can best understand as
simply a vibration in the ether--an extremely high frequency one.
While not rigidly scientific, that is close enough for you and me.
Nobody knows what the stuff really is, and it cannot be explained or
demonstrated by any model or concept in three-dimensional space. Its
physical-mathematical interpretation, the only way in which it can be
grasped at all, requires sixteen coordinates in four dimensions, and
I don't suppose you'd care to go into that."
"I'll say I wouldn't!" she exclaimed, feelingly.
"Well, anyway, by the use of suitable fields of force it can be used
as a carrier wave. Most of this stuff of the fields of force--how to
carry the modulation up and down through all the frequency changes
necessary--was figured out by the Martians ages ago. Used as a pure
carrier wave, with a sender and a receiver at each end, it isn't so
bad--that's why our communicator and radio systems work as well as they
do. They are pretty good, really, but the ultra-light vision system
is something else again. Sending the heterodyned wave through steel
is easy, but breaking it up, so as to view an object and return the
impulses, was an awful job and one that isn't half done yet. We see
things, after a fashion and at a distance of a few kilometers, by
sending an almost parallel wave from a twin-projector to disintegrate
and double back the viewing wave. That's the way the lookout plates and
lenses work, all over the ship--from the master-screens in the control
room to the plates of the staterooms and lifeboats and the viewing-areas
of the promenades. But the whole system is a rotten makeshift, and...."
"Just a minute!" exclaimed the girl. "I and everybody else have been
thinking that everything is absolutely perfect; and yet every single
thing you have talked about, you have ended up by describing as
'unknown,' 'rudimentary,' 'temporary,' or a 'makeshift.' You speak as
though the entire system were a poor thing that will have to do until
something better has been found, and that nobody knows anything about
anything! How do you get that way?"
"By working with Brandon and Westfall. Those birds have got real brains
and they're on the track of something that will, in all probability, be
as far ahead of Roeser's Rays as our present system is ahead of the
science of the seventeenth century."
"Really?" she looked at him in astonishment. "Tell me about it."
"Can't be done," he refused. "I don't know much about it--even they
didn't know any too much about some of it when I had to come in. And
what little I do know I can't tell, because it isn't mine."
"But you're working with them, aren't you?"
"Yes, in the sense that a small boy helps his father build a house.
They're the brains--I simply do some figuring that they don't want to
waste time doing."
Nadia, having no belief whatever in his modest disclaimer, but in secret
greatly pleased by his attitude, replied:
"Of course you couldn't say anything about an unfinished project--I
shouldn't have asked. Where do we go from here?"
"Down the lining of the hull, outside the passengers' quarters to the
upper dirigible projectors," and he led the way down a series of steep
steel stairways, through bulkheads and partitions of steel. "One thing
I forgot to tell you about--the detectors. They're worked on the same
principle as the lights, and are just about as efficient. Instead, of
light, though, they send out cones of electromagnetic waves, which set
up induced currents in any conductor encountered beyond our own shell.
Since all dangerous meteorites have been shown to contain conducting
material, that is enough to locate them, for radio finders automatically
determine the direction, distance, and magnitude of the disturbance, and
swing a light on it. That was what happened when that light swung toward
us, back there in the prow."
"Are there any of those life-boats, that I've heard discussed so much
lately, near here?" asked the girl.
"Lots of 'em--here's one right here," and at the next landing he opened
a vacuum-insulated steel door, snapped on a light, and waved his hand.
"You can't see much of it from here, but it's a complete space-ship
in itself, capable of maintaining a dozen or fifteen persons during
a two-weeks' cruise in space."
"Why isn't it a good idea to retain them? Accidents are still possible,
are they not?"
"Of course, and there is no question of doing away with them entirely.
Modern ships, however, have only enough of them to take care of the
largest number of persons ever to be carried by the vessel."
"Has the _Arcturus_ more than she needs?"
"I'll say she has, and more of everything else, except room for
pay-load."
"I've heard them talking about junking her. I think it's a shame."
"So do I, in a way--you see, I helped design her and her sister-ship,
the _Sirius_, which Brandon and Westfall are using as a floating
laboratory. But times change, and the inefficient must go. She's a good
old tub, but she was built when everybody was afraid of space, and we
had to put every safety factor into her that we could think of. As a
result, she is four times as heavy as she should be, and that takes a
lot of extra power. Her skin is too thick. She has too many batteries of
accumulators, too many life-boats, too many bulkheads and air-breaks,
too many and too much of everything. She is so built that if she should
break up out in space, nobody would die if they lived through the
shock--there are so many bulkheads, air-breaks, and life-boats that
no matter how many pieces she broke up into, the survivors would find
themselves in something able to navigate. That excessive construction
is no longer necessary. Modern ships carry ten times the pay-load on
one-quarter of the power that this old battle-wagon uses. Even though
she's only four years old, she's a relic of the days when we used to
slam through on the ecliptic route, right through all the meteoric
stuff that is always there--trusting to heavy armor to ward off
anything too small for the observers and detectors to locate. Now, with
the observatories and check-stations out in space, fairly light armor
is sufficient, as we route ourselves well away from the ecliptic and so
miss all the heavy stuff. So, badly as I hate to see her go there, the
old tub is bound for the junk-yard."
  *  *  *  *  *
A few more flights of stairs brought them to the upper band of dirigible
projectors, which encircled the hull outside the passengers' quarters,
some sixty feet below the prow. They were heavy, search-light-like
affairs mounted upon massive universal bearings, free to turn in any
direction, and each having its converter nestling inside its prodigious
field of force. Stevens explained that these projectors were used in
turning the vessel and in dodging meteorites when necessary, and they
went on through another almost invisible door into a hall and took an
elevator down to the main corridor.
"Well, you've seen it, Miss Newton," Stevens said regretfully, as he
led her toward the captain's office. "The lower half is full of heavy
stuff--accumulators, machinery, driving projectors, and such junk, so
that the center of gravity is below the center of action of the driving
projectors. That makes stable flight possible. It's all more or less
like what we've just seen, and I don't suppose you want to miss the
dance--anyway, a lot of people want to dance with you."
"Wouldn't you just as soon show me through the lower half as dance?"
"Rather, lots!"
"So would I. I can dance any time, and I want to see everything.
Let's go!"
Down they went, past battery after battery of accumulators; climbing
over and around the ever-increasing number of huge steel girders and
bracers; through mazes of heavily insulated wiring and conduits; past
mass after mass of automatic machinery which Stevens explained to his
eager listener. They inspected one of the great driving projectors,
which, built rigidly parallel to the axis of the ship and held immovably
in place by enormous trusses of steel, revealed neither to the eye nor
to the ear any sign of the terrific force it was exerting. Still lower
they went, until the girl had been shown everything, even down to the
bottom ultra-lights and stern braces.
"Tired?" Stevens asked, as the inspection was completed.
"Not very. It's been quite a climb, but I've had a wonderful time."
"So have I," he declared, positively. "I know what--we'll crawl up into
one of these stern lifeboats and make us a cup of coffee before we climb
back. With me?"
"'Way ahead of you!" Nadia accepted the invitation enthusiastically,
and they made their way to the nearest of the miniature space-cruisers.
Here, although no emergency had been encountered in all the four years
of the vessel's life, they found everything in readiness, and the two
soon had prepared and eaten a hearty luncheon.
"Well, I can't think of any more excuses for monopolizing you, Miss
Newton, so I suppose I'll have to take you back. Believe me, I've
enjoyed this more than you can realize--I've...."
He broke off and listened, every nerve taut. "What was that?" he
exclaimed.
"What was what? I didn't hear anything?"
"Something screwy somewhere! I felt a vibration, and anything that'd
make this mountain of steel even quiver must have given us one
gosh-awful nudge. There's another!"
The girl, painfully tense, felt only a barely perceptible tremor, but
the computer, knowing far better than she the inconceivable strength and
mass of that enormous structure of solidly braced hardened steel, sprang
into action. Leaping to the small dirigible look-out plate, he turned on
the power and swung it upward.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Great suffering snakes!" he ejaculated, then stood mute, for the
plate revealed a terrible sight. The entire nose of the gigantic craft
had been sheared off in two immense slices as though clipped off by a
gigantic sword, and even as they stared, fascinated, at the sight, the
severed slices were drifting slowly away. Swinging the view along the
plane of cleavage, Stevens made out a relatively tiny ball of metal,
only fifty feet or so in diameter, at a distance of perhaps a mile.
From this ball there shot a blinding plane of light, and the _Arcturus_
fell apart at the midsection, the lower half separating clean from
the upper portion, which held the passengers. Leaving the upper half
intact, the attacker began slicing the lower, driving half into thin,
disk-shaped sections. As that incandescent plane of destruction made
its first flashing cut through the body of the _Arcturus_, accompanied
by an additional pyrotechnic display of severed and short-circuited
high-tension leads, Stevens and Nadia suddenly found themselves floating
weightless in the air of the room. Still gripping the controls of the
look-out plate, Stevens caught the white-faced girl with one hand, drew
her down beside him, and held her motionless while his keen mind flashed
over all the possibilities of the situation and planned his course
of action.
"They're apparently slicing us pretty evenly, and by the looks of
things, one cut is coming right about here," he explained rapidly, as
he found a flashlight and drew his companion through the door and along
a narrow passage. Soon he opened another door and led her into a tiny
compartment so low that they could not stand upright--a mere cubicle of
steel. Carefully closing the door, he fingered dials upon each of the
walls of the cell, then folded himself up into a comfortable position,
instructed Nadia to do the same, and snapped off the light.
"Please leave it on," the shaken girl asked. "It's so ghastly!"
"We'd better save it, Nadia," he advised, pressing her arm reassuringly,
"it's the only light we've got, and we may need it worse later on--its
life is limited, you know."
"Later on? Do you think we'll need anything--later on?"
"Sure! Of course they may get us, Nadia, but this little tertiary
air-break is a mighty small target for them to hit. And if they miss us,
as I think they will, there's a larger room opening off each wall of
this one--at least one of which will certainly be left intact. From any
one of those rooms we can reach a life-boat. Of course, it's a little
too much to expect that any one of the life-boats will be left whole,
but they're bulkheaded, too, you know, so that we can be sure of finding
something able to navigate--providing we can make our get-away. Believe
me, ace, I'm sure glad we're aboard the old _Arcturus_ right now, with
all her safety-devices, instead of on one of the modern liners. We'd be
sunk right."
"I felt sunk enough for a minute--I'm feeling better now, though, since
you are taking it so calmly."
"Sure--why not? A man's not dead until his heart stops beating, you
know--our turn'll come next, when they let up a little."
"But suppose they change the width of their slices, and hit this cubby,
small as it is?"
"It'd be just too bad," he shrugged. "In that case, we'd never know
what hit us, so it's no good worrying about it. But say, we might do
something at that, if they didn't hit us square. I can move fairly fast,
and might be able to get a door open before the loss of pressure seals
it. We'll light the flash ... here, you hold it, so that I can have both
hands free. Put both arms around me, just under the arms, and stick to
me like a porous plaster, because if I have to move at all, I'll have
to jump like chain lightning. Shine the beam right over there, so it'll
reflect and light up all the dials at once. There ... hold on tight!
Here they come!"
As he spoke, a jarring shudder shook one side of their hiding-place,
then, a moment later, the phenomenon was repeated, but with much less
force, upon the other side. Stevens sighed with relief, took the light,
and extinguished it.
"Missed us clean!" he exulted. "Now, if they don't find us, we're all
set."
"How can they possibly find us? I seem to be always worried about the
wrong things, but I should think that their finding us would be the
least of our troubles."
"Don't judge their vision system by ours--they've got everything,
apparently. However, their apparatus may not be delicate enough to spot
us in a space this small when their projectors flash through it, as they
probably will. Then, too, there's a couple of other big items in our
favor--nobody else is in the entire lower half, since all this machinery
down here is either automatic or else controlled from up above, so they
won't be expecting to see anybody when they get down this far; and we
aren't at all conspicuous. We're both dressed in gray--your clothes in
particular are almost exactly the color of this armor-plate--so
altogether we stand a good chance of being missed."
"What shall we do now?"
"Nothing whatever--wish we could sleep for a couple of hours, but of
course there's no hope of that. Stretch out here, like that--you can't
rest folded up like an accordion--and I'll lie down diagonally across
the room. There's just room for me that way. That's one advantage of
weightlessness--you can lie down standing on your head, and go to sleep
and like it. But I forgot--you've never been weightless before, have
you? Does it make you sick?"
"Not so much, now, except that I feel awfully weird inside. I was
horribly dizzy and nauseated at first, but it's going away."
  *  *  *  *  *
"That's good--it makes lots of people pretty sick. In fact, some folks
get awfully sick and can't seem to get used to it at all. It's the
canals in the inner ear that do most of it, you know. However, if you're
as well as that already, you'll be a regular spacehound in half an hour.
I've been weightless for weeks at a stretch, out in the _Sirius_, and
now I've got so I really like it. Here, we'd better keep in touch."
He found her hand and tucked it under his arm. "Stabilize our positions
more, besides keeping us from getting too lonesome, here in the dark,"
he concluded, in a matter-of-fact voice.
"Thanks for saying 'us'--but you would, wouldn't you?" and a wave of
admiration went through her for the real and chivalrous manhood of the
man with whom she had been forced by circumstances to cast her lot.
"How long must we stay here?"
"As long as the air lasts, and I'd like to stay here longer than that.
We don't want to move around any more than we absolutely have to until
their rays are off of us, and we have no way of knowing how long that
will be. Also, we'd better keep still. I don't know what kind of an
audio system they've got, but there's no use taking unnecessary
chances."
"All x--I'm an oyster's little sister," and for many minutes the
two remained motionless and silent. Now and then Nadia twitched and
started at some vague real or imaginary sound--now and then her fingers
tightened upon his biceps--and he pressed her hand with his great arm in
reassurance and understanding. Once a wall of their cell resounded under
the impact of a fierce blow and Stevens instantly threw his arm around
the girl, twisting himself between her and the threatened wall, ready
for any emergency. But nothing more happened; the door remained closed,
the cell stayed bottle-tight, and time wore slowly on. All too soon the
unmistakable symptoms of breathing an unfit atmosphere made themselves
apparent and Stevens, after testing each of the doors, drew the girl
into a larger room, where they breathed deeply of the fresh, cool air.
"How did you know that this room was whole?" asked Nadia. "We might have
stepped out into space, mightn't we?"
"No; if this room had lost its tightness, the door wouldn't have opened.
They won't open if there's a difference of one kilogram pressure on the
two sides. That's how I knew that the room we were in at first was cut
in two--the door into that air-break wouldn't move."
"What comes next?"
"I don't know exactly what to do--we'd better hold a little council of
war. They may have gone..." Stevens broke off as the structure began
to move, and they settled down upon what had been one of the side-walls.
Greater and greater became the acceleration, until their apparent weight
was almost as much as it would have been upon the Earth, at which point
it became constant. "... but they haven't," he continued the interrupted
sentence. "This seems to be a capture and seizure, as well as an attack,
so we'll have to take the risk of looking at them. Besides, it's getting
cold in here. One or two of the adjoining cells have apparently been
ruptured and we're radiating our heat out into space, so we'll have to
get into a life-boat or freeze. I'll go pick out the best one. Wonder
if I'd better take you with me, or hide you and come back after you?"
"Don't worry about that--I'm coming with you," Nadia declared, positively.
"Just as well, probably," he assented, and they set out. A thorough
exploration of all the tight connecting cells revealed that not a
lifeboat within their reach remained intact, but that habitable and
navigable portions of three such craft were available. Selecting the
most completely equipped of these, they took up their residence therein
by entering it and closing the massive insulating door. Stevens
disconnected all the lights save one, and so shielded that one before
turning it on that it merely lightened the utter darkness into a
semi-permeable gloom. He then stepped up to the lookout plate, and with
his hand upon the control, pondered long the possible consequences of
what he wished to do.
"What harm would it do to take just a little peek?"
"I don't know--that's the dickens of it. Maybe none, and then again,
maybe a lot. You see, we don't know who or what we are up against. The
only thing we know is that they've got us beat a hundred ways, and we've
got to act accordingly. We've got to chance it sometime, though, if we
can ever get away, so we might as well do it now. I'll put it on very
short range first, and see what we can see. By the small number of cells
we've got here I'm afraid they've split us up lengthwise, too--so that
instead of having a whole slice of the old watermelon to live in, we've
got only about a sixth of one--shaped about like a piece of restaurant
pie. One thing I can do, though. I'll turn on the communicator receiver
and put it on full coverage--maybe we can hear something useful."
Putting a little power upon the visiray plate, he moved the point of
projection a short distance from their hiding-place, so that the plate
showed a view of the wreckage. The upper half of the vessel was still
intact, the lower half a jumble of sharply-cut fragments. From each of
the larger pieces a brilliant ray of tangible force stretched outward.
Suddenly their receiver sounded behind them, as the high-powered
transmitter in the telegraph room tried to notify headquarters of
their plight.
"_Arcturus_ attacked and cut up being taken tow...."
Rapidly as the message was uttered the transmitter died with a rattle
in the middle of a word, and Nadia looked at Stevens with foreboding in
her eyes.
"They've got something, that's one thing sure, to be able to neutralize
our communicator beams that way," he admitted. "Not so good--we'll have
to play this close to our vests, girl!"
"Are you just trying to cheer me up, or do you really think we have a
chance?" she demanded. "I want to know just where we stand."
"I'm coming clean with you, no kidding. If we can get away, we'll be all
x, because I'll bet a farm that by this time Brandon's got everything
those birds have, and maybe more. They beat us to it, that's all. I'm
kind of afraid, though, that getting away isn't going to be quite as
simple as shooting fish down a well."
  *  *  *  *  *
Far ahead of them a port opened, a lifeboat shot out at its full power,
and again their receiver tried to burst into sound, but it was a vain
attempt. The sound died before one complete word could be uttered, and
the lifeboat, its power completely neutralized by the rays of the tiny
craft of the enemy, floated gently back toward the mass of its parent
and accompanied it in its headlong flight. Several more lifeboats made
the attempt, as the courageous officers of the _Arcturus_, some of
whom had apparently succeeded in eluding the vigilance of the captors,
launched the little shells from various ports; but as each boat issued,
its power was neutralized and it found itself dragged helplessly along
in the grip of one of those mysterious, brilliant rays of force. At
least one hidden officer must have been watching the fruitless efforts,
for the next lifeboat to issue made no attempt, either to talk or to
flee, but from it there flamed out into space a concentrated beam of
destruction--the terrible ray of annihilation, against which no known
substance could endure for a moment; the ray which had definitely
outlawed war. But even that frightful weapon was useless--it spent
its force harmlessly upon an impalpable, invisible barrier, a hundred
yards from its source, and the bold lifeboat disappeared in one blinding
explosion of incandescence as the captor showed its real power in
retaliation. Stevens, jaw hard-set, leaped from the screen, then brought
himself up so quickly that he skated across the smooth steel floor.
Shutting off the lookout plate, he led the half-fainting girl across
the room to a comfortable seat and sat down beside her--raging, but
thoughtful. Nadia soon recovered.
"Why are you acting so contrary to your nature--is it because of _me_?"
she demanded. "A dozen times I've seen you start to do something and
then change your mind. I _will not_ be a load on you nor hinder you in
anything you want to do."
"I told your father I'd look after you, and I'm going to do it," he
replied, indirectly. "I would do it anyway, of course--even if you are
ten or twelve years older than I thought you were."
"Yes, Dad never has realized that I'm more than eight years old. I
see--you were going out there and be slaughtered?" He flushed, but made
no reply. "In that case I'm glad I'm here--that would have been silly.
I think we'd better hold that council of war you mentioned a while ago,
don't you?"
"I need a smoke--do you indulge?"
"No thanks. I tried it a few times at school, but never liked it."
He searched his pockets, bringing to light an unopened package and a
tattered remnant which proved to contain one dilapidated cigarette.
He studied it thoughtfully. "I'll smoke this wreck," he decided, "while
it's still smokable. We'll save the rest of them--I'm afraid it'll be
a long time between smokes. Well, let's confer!"
"This will have to be a one-sided conference. I don't imagine that any
of my ideas will prove particularly helpful. You talk and I'll listen.
"You can't tell what ideas may be useful--chip in any time you feel the
urge. Here's the dope, as I see it. They're highly intelligent creatures
and are in all probability neither Martians nor Venerians. If any of
them had any such stuff as that, some of us would have known about it
and, besides, I don't believe they would have used it in just that way.
Mercury is not habitable, at least for organic beings; and we have never
seen any sign of any other kind of inhabitants who could work with
metals and rays. They're probably from Jupiter, although possibly from
further away. I say Jupiter, because I would think, judging from the
small size of the ship, that it may still be in the experimental stage,
so that they probably didn't come from any further away than Jupiter.
Then, too, if they were very numerous, somebody would have sighted one
before. I'd give my left leg and four fingers for one good look at the
inside of that ship."
"Why didn't you take it, then? You never even looked toward it, after
that one first glimpse."
"I'll say I didn't--the reason being that they may have automatic
detectors, and as I have suggested before, our system of vision is so
crude that its use could be detected with a clothesline or a basket
full of scrap iron. But to resume: Their aim is to capture, not destroy,
since they haven't killed anybody except the one crew that attacked
them. Apparently they want to study us or something. However, they don't
intend that any of us shall get away, nor even send out a word of what
has happened to us. Therefore it looks as though our best bet is to hide
now, and try to sneak away on them after a while--direct methods won't
work. Right?"
"You sound lucid. Is there any possibility of getting back, though, if
we got anywhere near Jupiter? It's so far away!"
"It's a long stretch from Jupiter to any of the planets where we have
power-plants, all right--particularly now, when Mars and Tellus are
subtending an angle of something more than ninety degrees at the sun,
and Venus is between the two, while Jupiter is clear across the sun from
all three of them. Even when Jupiter is in mean opposition to Mars, it
is still some five hundred and fifty million kilometers away, so you
can form some idea as to how far it is from our nearest planet now.
No, if we expect to get back under our own power, we've got to break away
pretty quick--these lifeboats have very little accumulator capacity, and
the receptors are useless above about three hundred million
kilometers...."
"But it'll take us a long time to go that far, won't it?"
"Not very. Our own ships, using only the acceleration of gravity, and
both plus and minus at that, make the better than four hundred million
kilometers of the long route to Mars in five days. These birds are using
almost that much acceleration, and I don't see how they do it. They must
have a tractor ray. Brandon claimed that such a thing was theoretically
possible, but Westfall and I couldn't see it. We ragged him about it a
lot--and he was right. I thought, of course, they'd drift with us, but
they are using power steadily. They've got _some_ system!"
"Suppose they could be using intra-atomic energy? We were taught that it
was impossible, but you've shattered a lot of my knowledge today."
"I wouldn't want to say definitely that it is absolutely impossible,
but the deeper we go into that line, the more unlikely intra-atomic
energy power-plants become. No, they've got a real power-transmission
system--one that can hold a tight beam together a lot farther than
anything we have been able to develop, that's all. Well, we've given
them quite a lot of time to get over any suspicion of us, let's see
if we can sneak away from them."
  *  *  *  *  *
By short and infrequent applications of power to the dirigible
projectors of the life-boat, Stevens slowly shifted the position of
the fragment which bore their craft until it was well clear of the
other components of the mass of wreckage. He then exerted a very small
retarding force, so that their bit would lag behind the procession, as
though it had accidently been separated. But the crew of the captor was
alert, and no sooner did a clear space show itself between them and the
mass than a ray picked them up and herded them back into place. Stevens
then nudged other pieces so that they fell out, only to see them also
rounded up. Hour after hour he kept trying--doing nothing sufficiently
energetic to create any suspicion, but attempting everything he could
think of that offered any chance of escape from the clutches of their
captors. Immovable at the plate, his hands upon the controls, he
performed every insidious maneuver his agile brain could devise, but
he could not succeed in separating their vehicle from its fellows.
Finally, after a last attempt, which was foiled as easily as were its
predecessors, he shut off his controls and turned to his companion
with a grin.
"I didn't think I could get away with it--they're keen, that gang--but
I had to keep at it as long as it would have done us any good."
"Wouldn't it do us any good now?"
"Not a bit--we're going so fast that we couldn't stop--we're out of even
radio range of our closest power-plant. We'll have to put off any more
attempts until they slow us down. They're fairly close to at least one
of the moons of Jupiter, we'll have our best chance--so good, in fact,
that I really think we can make it."
"But what good would that do us, if we couldn't get back?" Dire
foreboding showed in her glorious eyes.
"Lots of things not tried yet, girl, and we'll try them all. First, we
get away. Second, we try to get in touch with Norman Brandon...."
"How? No known radio will carry half that far."
"No, but I think that a radio as yet unknown may be able to--and there
is a bare possibility that I'll be able to communicate."
"Oh wonderful--that lifts a frightful load off my mind," she breathed.
"But just a minute--I said I'd come clean with you, and I will. The odds
are all against us, no matter what we do. If that unknown radio won't
work--and it probably won't--there are several other things we can try,
but they're all pretty slim chances. Even if we get away, it'll probably
be about the same thing as though you were to be marooned on a desert
island without any tools, and with your rescue depending upon your
ability to build a high-powered radio station with which to call to
a mainland for help. However, if we don't try to get away, our only
alternative is letting them know we're here, and joining our friends
in captivity."
"And then what?"
"You know as much as I do. Imprisonment and restraint, certain; death,
possible; return to Earth, almost certainly impossible--life as guests,
highly improbable."
"I'm with you, Steve, all the way."
"Well, it's time to spring off--we've both been awake better than fifty
hours. Personally, I'm all in, and you're so near dead that you're a
physical wreck. We'll get us a bite of supper and turn in."
An appetizing supper was prepared from the abundant stores and each
ate a heartier meal than either would have believed possible. Stevens
considered his unopened package of cigarettes, then regretfully put it
back into his pocket still unopened and turned to Nadia.
"Well, little fellow, it's time to shove off, and then some. You might
as well sleep here, and I'll go in there. If anything scares you, yell.
Good-night, old trapper!"
"Wait a minute, Steve." Nadia flushed, and her brown eyes and black
eyebrows, in comparison with her golden-blond hair, lent her face a
quizzical, elfin expression that far belied her feelings as she stared
straight into his eyes. "I've never even been away from the Earth
before, and with all this happening I'm simply scared to death. I've
been trying to hide it, but I couldn't stand it alone, and we're going
to be together too long and too close for senseless conventions to
affect us. There's two bunks over there--why don't you sleep in one
of them?"
He returned her steadfast gaze for a moment in silence.
"All x with me, Nadia," he answered, keeping out of his voice all
signs of the tenderness he felt for her, and of his very real admiration
for her straightforward conduct in a terrifying situation. "You trust
me, then?"
"_Trust_ you! Don't be silly--I know you! I know you, and I know Brandon
and Westfall--I know what you've done, and exactly the kind of men you
are. _Trust_ you!"
"Thanks, old golf-shootist," and promises were made and received
in a clasp from which Nadia's right hand, strong as it was, emerged
slightly damaged.
"By the way, what is your first name, fellow-traveller?" she asked in
lighter vein. "Nobody, not even Dad or Breckie, ever seems to call you
anything but 'Steve' when they talk about you." She was amazed at the
effect of her innocent question, for Stevens flushed to his hair and
spluttered.
"It's _Percy_!" He finally, snorted. "Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens.
Wouldn't that tear it?"
"Why, I think Percival's a real nice name!"
"Silence!" he hissed in burlesque style. "Young woman, I have revealed
to you a secret known to but few living creatures. On your life, keep
it inviolate!"
"Oh, very well, if you insist. Good-night--Steve!" and she gave him a
radiant and honest smile: the first smile he had seen since the moment
of the attack.
CHAPTER III
Castaways Upon Ganymede
Upon awakening, the man's first care was to instruct the girl in the
operation of the projectors, so that she could keep the heavily-armored
edge of their small section, which she had promptly christened "The
Forlorn Hope," between them and the grinding, clashing mass of wreckage,
and thus, if it should become necessary, protect the relatively frail
inner portions of their craft from damage.
"Keep an eye on things for a while, Nadia," he instructed, as soon as
she could handle the controls, "and don't use any more power than is
absolutely necessary. We'll need it all, and besides, they can probably
detect anything we can use. There's probably enough leakage from the
ruptured accumulator cells to mask quite a little emission, but don't
use much. I'm going to see what I can do about making this whole wedge
navigable."
"Why not just launch what's left of this lifeboat? It's space-worthy,
isn't it?"
"Yes, but it's too small. Two or three of the big dirigible projectors
of the lower band are on the rim of this piece-of-pie-shaped section
we're riding, I think. If so, and if enough batteries of accumulators
are left intact to give them anywhere nearly full power, we can get an
acceleration that will make a lifeboat look sick. Those main dirigibles,
you know, are able to swing the whole mass of the _Arcturus_, and what
they'll do to this one chunk of it--we've got only a few thousand tons
of mass in this piece--will be something pretty. Also, having the metal
may save us months of time in mining it."
He found the projectors, repaired or cut out the damaged accumulator
cells, and reconnected them through the controls of the lifeboat.
He moved into the "engine-room" the airtanks, stores, and equipment
from all the other fragments which, by means of a space-suit, he could
reach without too much difficulty. From the battery rooms of those
fragments--open shelves, after being sliced open by the shearing ray--he
helped himself to banks of accumulator cells from the enormous driving
batteries of the ill-fated _Arcturus_, bolting them down and connecting
them solidly until almost every compartment of their craft was one mass
of stored-up energy.
Days fled like hours, so furiously busy were they in preparing their
peculiar vessel for a cruise of indefinite duration. Stevens cut himself
short on sleep and snatched his meals in passing; and Nadia, when not
busy at her own tasks of observing, housekeeping, and doing what little
piloting was required, was rapidly learning to wield most effectively
the spanner and pliers of the mechanic and electrician.
"I'm afraid our time is getting short, Steve," she announced, after
making an observation. "It looks as though we're getting wherever it
is we're going."
"Well, I've got only two more jobs to do, but they're the hardest of the
lot. It is Jupiter, or can you tell yet?"
"Jupiter or one of its satellites, I think, from the point where they
reversed their power. Here's the observation you told me to take."
"Looks like Jupiter," he agreed, after he had rapidly checked her
figures. "We'll pass very close to one of those two satellites--probably
Ganymede--which is fine for our scheme. All four of the major satellites
have water and atmosphere, but Ganymede, being largest, is best for our
purposes. We've got a couple of days yet--just about time to finish up.
Let's get going--you know what to do."
"Steve, I'm afraid of it. It's too dangerous--isn't there some other
way?"
"None that I can see. The close watch they're keeping on every bit of
this junk makes it our only chance for a get-away. I'm pretty sure I
can do it--but if I should happen to get nipped, just use enough power
to let them know you're here, and you won't be any worse off than if
I hadn't tried to pull off this stunt."
He donned a space-suit, filled a looped belt with tools, picked up a
portable power-drill, and stepped into the tiny air-lock. Nadia deftly
guided their segment against one of the larger fragments and held it
there with a gentle, steady pressure, while Stevens, a light cable
paying out behind him, clambered carefully over the wreckage, brought
his drill into play, and disappeared inside the huge wedge. In less than
an hour he returned without mishap and reported to the glowing girl.
"Just like shooting fish down a well! Most of the accumulator cells were
tight, and installing the relays wasn't a bad job at all. Believe me,
girl, there'll be junk filling all the space between here and Saturn
when we touch them off!"
"Wonderful, Steve!" Nadia exclaimed. "It won't be so bad seeing you go
into the others, now that you have this one all rigged up."
  *  *  *  *  *
Around and around the mass of wreckage they crept, and in each of the
larger sections Stevens connected up the enormous fixed or dirigible
projectors to whatever accumulator cells were available through
sensitive relays, all of which he could close by means of one radio
impulse. The long and dangerous task done, he stood at the lookout
plate, studying the huge disk which had been the upper portion of the
lower half of the _Arcturus_ and frowning in thought. Nadia reached over
his shoulder and switched off the plate.
"Nix on that second job, big fellow!" she declared. "They aren't really
necessary, and you're altogether too apt to be killed trying to get
them. It's too ghastly--I won't stand for your trying it, so that
ends it."
"We ought to have them, really," he protested. "With those special
tools, cutting torches, and all the stuff, we'd be sitting pretty.
We'll lose weeks of time by not having them."
"We'll just have to lose it, then. You can't get 'em, any more than
a baby can get the moon, so stop crying about it," she went over the
familiar argument for the twentieth time. "That stuff up there is all
grinding together like cakes of ice in a floe; the particular section
you want is in plain sight of whoever is on watch; and those tools and
things are altogether too heavy to handle. You're a husky brute, I know,
but even you couldn't begin to handle them, even if you had good going.
I couldn't help you very much, even if you'd let me try; and the fact
that you so positively refuse to let me come along shows how dangerous
you know the attempt is bound to be. You'd probably never even get up
there alive, to say nothing of getting back here. No, Steve, that's out
like a light."
"I sure wish they'd left us weightless for a while, sometime, if only
for an hour or two," he mourned.
"But they didn't!" she retorted, practically. "So we're just out of luck
to that extent. Our time is about up, too. It's time you worked us back
to the tail end of this procession--or rather, the head end, since we're
traveling 'down' now."
Stevens took the controls and slowly worked along the outer edge of the
mass, down toward its extremity. Nadia put one hand upon his shoulder
and he glanced around.
"Thanks, Steve. We have a perfectly wonderful chance as it is, and we've
gone so far with our scheme together that it would be a crying shame not
to be able to go through with it. I'd hate like sin to have to surrender
to them now, and that's all I could do if anything should become of you.
Besides..." her voice died away into silence.
"Sure, you're right," he hastily replied, dodging the implication of
that unfinished sentence. "I couldn't figure out anything that looked
particularly feasible anyway--that's why I didn't try it. We'll pass
it up."
Soon they arrived at their objective and maintained a position well in
the van, but not sufficiently far ahead of the rest to call forth a
restraining ray from their captors. Already strongly affected by the
gravitational pull of the mass of the satellite, many of the smaller
portions of the wreck, not directly held by the tractors, began to
separate from the main mass. As each bit left its place another beam
leaped out, until it became apparent that no more were available, and
Stevens strapped the girl and himself down before two lookout plates.
"Now for it, Nadia!" he exclaimed, and simultaneously threw on the power
of his own projectors and sent out the radio impulse which closed the
relays he had so carefully set. They were thrown against the restraining
straps savagely and held there by an enormous weight as the gigantic
dirigible projectors shot their fragment of the wreck away from the
comparatively slight force which had been acting upon it, but they
braced themselves and strained their muscles in order to watch what
was happening. As the relays in the various fragments closed, the
massed power of the accumulators was shorted dead across the converters
and projectors instead of being fed into them gradually through the
controls of the pilot, with a result comparable to that of the explosion
of an ammunition dump. Most of the masses, whose projectors were fed
by comparatively few accumulator cells, darted away entirely with a
stupendous acceleration. A few of them, however, received the unimpeded
flow of complete batteries. Those projectors tore loose from even
their massive supports and crashed through anything opposing them like
a huge, armor-piercing projectile. It was a spectacle to stagger the
imagination, and Stevens grinned as he turned to the girl, who was
staring in wide-eyed amazement.
"Well, ace, I think they're busy enough now so that it'll be safe
to take that long-wanted look at their controls," and he flashed
the twin beams of his lookout light out beyond the upper half of the
_Arcturus_--only to see them stop abruptly in mid-space. Even the
extremely short carrier-wave of Roeser's Rays could not go through the
invisible barrier thrown out by the tiny, but powerful globe of space.
"No penetration?" Nadia asked.
"Flattened them out cold. 'However,' as the fox once remarked about the
grapes, 'I'll bet they're sour, anyway.' We'll have some stuff of our
own, one of these days. I sure hope the fireworks we started back there
keep those birds amused until we get out of sight, because if I use much
more power on these projectors we may not have juice enough left to stop
with."
"You're using enough now to suit me--I'm so heavy I can hardly lift
a finger!"
"You'd better lift 'em! You must watch what's going on back there while
I navigate around this moon."
"All x, chief.... They've got their hands full, apparently. Those rays
are shooting around all over the sky. It looks as though they were
trying to capture four or five things at once with each one."
"Good! Tell me when the moon cuts them off."
  *  *  *  *  *
At the awful acceleration they were using, which constantly increased
the terrific velocity with which they had been traveling when they made
good their escape, it was not long until they had placed the satellite
between them and the enemy; then Stevens cut down and reversed his
power. Such was their speed, however, that a long detour was necessary
in order to reduce it to a safe landing rate. As soon as this could be
done, Stevens headed for the morning zone and dropped the "Hope" rapidly
toward the surface of that new, strange world. Details could not be
distinguished at first because of an all-enshrouding layer of cloud, but
the rising sun dispelled the mist, and when they had descended to within
a few thousand feet of the surface, their vision was unobstructed.
Immediately below them the terrain was mountainous and heavily wooded;
while far to the east the rays of a small, pale sun glinted upon a vast
body of water. No signs of habitation were visible as far as the eye
could reach.
"Now to pick out a location for our power-plant. We must have a
waterfall for power, a good place to hide our ship from observation, and
I'd like to have a little seam of coal. We can use wood if we have to,
but I think we can find some coal. This is all sedimentary rock--it
looks a lot like the country along the North Fork of the Flathead, in
Montana. There are a lot of coal outcrops, usually, in such topography
as this is."
"We want to hide in a hurry, though, don't we?"
"Not particularly, I think. If they had missed us at all, they would
have had us long ago, and with all the damage we did with those
projectors they won't be surprised at one piece being missing--I imagine
they lost a good many."
"But they'll know that somebody caused all that disturbance. Won't they
hunt for us?"
"Maybe, and maybe not--no telling what they'll do. However, by the time
they can land and get checked up and ready to hunt for us, we'll be a
mighty small needle, well hidden in a good big haystack."
For several hours they roamed over the mountainous region at high
velocity, seeking the best possible location, and finally they found
one that was almost ideal--a narrow canyon overhung with heavy trees,
opening into a wide, deep gorge upon a level with its floor. A mighty
waterfall cascaded into the gorge just above the canyon, and here
and there could be seen black outcrops which Stevens, after a close
scrutiny, declared to be coal. He deftly guided their cumbersome wedge
of steel into the retreat, allowed it to settle gently to the ground,
and shut off the power.
"Well, little fellow-conspirator against the peace and dignity of the
Jovians, I don't know just where we are, but wherever it is, we're here.
We got away clean, and as long as we don't use any high-tension stuff or
anything else that they can trace, I think we're as safe as money in a
bank."
"I suppose that I ought to be scared to death, Steve, but I'm not--I'm
just too thrilled for words," Nadia answered, and the eager sparkle in
her eyes bore out her words. "Can we go out now? How about air? Shall we
wear suits or go out as we are? Have you got a weapon of any kind? Hurry
up--let's do something!"
"Pipe down, ace! Remember that we don't know any more about anything
around here than a pig does about Sunday, and conduct yourself
accordingly. Take it easy. I'm surprised at the gravity here. This is
certainly Ganymede, and it has a diameter of only about fifty seven
hundred kilometers. If I remember correctly, Damoiseau estimated its
mass at about three one-hundredths that of the Earth, which would make
its surface gravity about one-sixth. However, it is actually almost a
half, as you see by this spring-balance here. Therefore it is quite a
little more massive than has been...."
"What of it? Let's go places and do things!"
"Calm yourself, Ginger, you've got lots of time--we'll be here for quite
a while, I'm afraid. We can't go out until we analyze the air--we're
sure lucky there's as much as there is. I'm not exactly the world's
foremost chemist, but fortunately an air-analysis isn't much of a job
with the apparatus we carry."
While Nadia controlled her impatience as best she could, Stevens
manipulated the bulbs and pipettes of the gas apparatus.
"Pressure, fifty-two centimeters--more than I dared hope for--and
analysis all x, I believe. Oxygen concentration a little high, but
not much."
"We won't have to wear the space-suits, then?"
"Not unless I missed something in the analysis. The pressure corresponds
to our own at a height of about three thousand meters, which we can get
used to without too much trouble. Good thing, too. I brought along all
the air I could get hold of, but as I told you back there, if we had to
depend on it altogether, we might be out of luck. I'm going to pump some
of our air back into a cylinder to equalize our pressure--don't want
to waste any of it until we're sure the outside air suits us without
treatment."
  *  *  *  *  *
When the pressure inside had been gradually reduced to that outside and
they had become accustomed to breathing the rarefied medium, Stevens
opened the airlock and the outside doors, and for some time cautiously
sniffed the atmosphere of the satellite. He could detect nothing harmful
or unusual in it--it was apparently the same as earthly air--and he
became jubilant.
"All x, Nadia--luck is perched right on our banner. Freedom, air, water,
power, and coal! Now as you suggested, we'll go places and do things!"
"Suppose it's safe?" Her first eagerness to explore their surroundings
had abated noticeably. "You aren't armed, are you?"
"No, and I don't believe that there was a gun of any kind aboard the
_Arcturus_. That kind of thing went out quite a while ago, you know.
We'll take a look, anyway--we've got to find out about that coal before
we decide to settle down here. Remember this half-gravity stuff, and
control your leg-muscles accordingly."
Leaping lightly to the ground, they saw that the severed section of
fifty-inch armor, which was the rim of their conveyance, almost blocked
the entrance to the narrow canyon which they had selected for their
retreat. Upon one side that wall of steel actually touched the almost
perpendicular wall or rock; upon the other side there was left only a
narrow passage. They stepped through it, so that they could see the
waterfall and the gorge, and stopped silent. The sun, now fairly high,
was in no sense the familiar orb of day, but was a pale, insipid thing,
only one-fifth the diameter of the sun to which they were accustomed,
and which could almost be studied with the unshielded eye. From their
feet a grassy meadow a few hundred feet wide sloped gently down to the
river, from whose farther bank a precipice sprang upward for perhaps
a thousand feet--merging into towering hills whose rugged grandeur was
reminiscent of the topography of the moon. At their backs the wall of
the gorge was steep, but not precipitous, and was covered with shrubs
and trees--some of which leaned out over the little canyon, completely
screening it, and among whose branches birds could now and then be seen
flitting about. In that direction no mountains were visible, indicating
that upon their side of the river there was an upland plateau or bench.
To their right the river, the gorge, and the strip of meadow extended
for a mile or more, then curved away and were lost to sight. To their
left, almost too close for comfort, was the stupendous cataract,
towering above them to a terror-inspiring height. Nadia studied it
with awe, which changed to puzzled wonder.
"What's the matter with it, Steve? It looks like a picture in slow
motion, like the kind they take of your dives--or am I seeing things?"
"No, it's really slow, compared to what we're used to. Remember that
one-half gravity stuff!"
"Oh, that's right, but it certainly does look funny. It gives me the
creeps."
"You'll get used to it pretty quick--just as you'll get used to all the
rest of the things having only half their earthly weight and falling
only half as fast as they ought to when you drop them. Well, I don't see
anything that looks dangerous yet--let's go up toward the falls a few
meters and prospect that outcrop."
With a few brisk strokes of an improvised shovel he cleared the outcrop
of detritus and broke off several samples of the black substance, with
which they went back to the "Forlorn Hope."
"It's real coal," Stevens announced after a series of tests. "I've seen
better, but on the other hand, there's lots worse. It'll make good gas,
and a kind of a coke. Not so hot, but it'll do. Now we'd better get
organized old partner, for a long campaign."
"Go ahead and organize--I'm only the cheap help in this enterprise."
"Cheap help! You're apt to be the life of the party. Can you make and
shoot a bow and arrow?"
"I'll say I can--I've belonged to an archery club for five years."
"What did I tell you? You're a life saver! Here's the dope--we've got
to save our own supplies as much as possible until we know exactly what
we're up against, and to do that, we've got to live off the country.
I'll fake up something to knock over some of those birds and small game,
then we can make real bow-strings and feathered arrows and I'll forge
some steel arrow-heads while you're making yourself a real bow. We'd
better make me about a hundred-pound war bow, too...."
"A _hundred_!" interrupted Nadia. "That's a lot of bow, big boy--think
you can bend it?"
"You'd be surprised," he grinned. "I'm not quite like Robin Hood--I've
been known to miss a finger-thick wand at a hundred paces--but I'm not
exactly a beginner."
"Oh, of course--I should have known by your language that you're an
archer, otherwise you'd never have used such an old-fashioned word as
'pounds.' I shoot a thirty-five-pound bow ordinarily, but for game I
should have the heaviest one I can hold accurately--about a forty-five,
probably."
"All x. And as soon as I can I'll make us a couple of suits of fairly
heavy steel armor, so that we'll have real protection if we should need
it. You see, we don't know what we are apt to run up against out here.
Then, with that much done, it'll be up to you to provide, since I'll
have to work tooth and nail at the forges. You'll have to bring home the
bacon, do the cooking and so on, and see what you can find along the
line of edible roots, grains, fruits, and what-not. Sort of reverse the
Indian idea--you be the hunter and I'll keep the home fires burning.
Can do?"
"What it takes to do that, I've got," Nadia assured him, her eyes
sparkling. "Have you your job planned out as well and as fittingly as
you have mine?"
"And then some. We've got just two methods of getting away from
here--one is to get in touch with Brandon, so that he'll come after us;
the other is to recharge our accumulators and try to make it under our
own power. Either course will need power and lots of it...."
"I never thought of going back in the 'Hope.' Suppose we could?"
"About as doubtful as the radio--I think that I could build a pair of
matched-frequency auto-dirigible transmitter and receptor units, such as
are necessary for space-ships fed by stationary power-plants, but after
I got them built, they'd take us less than half way there. Then we'd
have only what power we can carry, and I hate even to think of what
probably would happen to us. We'd certainly have to drift for months
before we could get close enough to any of our plants to radio for help,
and we'd be taking awful chances. You see, we'd have to take a very
peculiar orbit, and if we should miss connections passing the inner
planets, what the sun would do to us at the closest point and where
what's left of us would go on the back-swing, would be just too bad!
Besides, if we can get hold of the _Sirius_, they'll come loaded for
bear, and we may be able to do something about the rest of the folks
out here."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Oh!" breathed the girl. "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could!
I thought, of course, they'd all be...." her voice died away.
"Not necessarily--there's always a chance. That's why I'm trying the
ultra-radio first. However, either course will take lots of power,
so the first thing I've got to do is to build a power plant. I'm
going to run a penstock up those falls, and put in a turbine, driving
a high-tension alternator. Then, while I'm trying to build the
ultra-radio, I'll be charging our accumulators, so that no time will
be lost in case the radio fails. If it does fail--and remember I'm not
counting on its working--of course I'll tackle the transmission and
receptor units before we start out to drift it."
"You say it easy, Steve, but how can you build all those things, with
nothing to work with?"
"It's going to be a real job--I'm not try to kid you into thinking it'll
be either easy or quick. Here's the way everything will go. Before I can
even lay the first length of the penstock, I've got to have the pipe--to
make which I've got to have flat steel--to get which I'll have to cut
some of the partitions out of this ship of ours--to do which I'll have
to have a cutting torch--to make which I'll have to forge nozzles out of
block metal and to run which I'll have to have gas--to get which I'll
have to mine coal and build a gas-plant--to do which...."
"Good heavens, Steve, are you going back to the Stone Age? I never
thought of half those things. Why, it's impossible!"
"Not quite, guy. Things could be a lot worse--that's why I brought along
the whole 'Forlorn Hope,' instead of just the lifeboat. As it is, we've
got several thousand tons of spare steel and lots of copper. We've got
ordinary tools and a few light motors, blowers, and such stuff. That
gives me a great big start--I won't have to mine the ores and smelt the
metals, as would have been necessary otherwise. However, it'll be plenty
bad. I'll have to start out in a pretty crude fashion, and for some of
the stuff I'll need I'll have to make, not only the machine that makes
the part I want, but also the machine that makes the machine that
makes the machine that makes it--and so on, just how far down the line,
I haven't dared to think."
"You must be a regular jack-of-all-trades, to think you can get away
with such a program as that?"
"I am--nothing else but. You see, while most of my school training
was in advanced physics and mathematics, I worked my way through by
computing and designing, and I've done a lot of truck-horse labor of
various kinds besides. I can calculate and design almost anything, and
I can make a pretty good stab at translating a design into fabricated
material. I wouldn't wonder if Brandon's ultra-radio would stop me,
since nobody had even started to build one when I saw him last--but I
helped compute it, know the forces involved as well as he did at that
time, and it so happens that I know more about the design of coils and
fields of force than I do about anything else. So I may be able to work
it out eventually. It isn't going to be not knowing how that will hold
me up--it'll be the lack of something that I can't build."
"And that's where you will go back and back and back, as you said about
building the penstock?"
"Back and back is right, if I can find all the necessary raw
materials--that's what's probably going to put a lot of monkey-wrenches
into the machinery." And Stevens went to work upon a weapon of offense,
fashioning a crude, but powerful bow from a strip of spring steel strung
with heavy wire.
"How about arrows? Shall I go see if I can hit a bird with a rock, for
feathers, and see if I can find something to make arrows out of?"
"Not yet--anyway, I'd bet on the birds! I'm going to use pieces of this
light brace-rod off the accumulator cells for arrows. They won't fly
true, of course, but with their mass I can give them enough projectile
force to kill any small animal they hit, no matter how they hit it."
After many misses, he finally bagged a small animal, something like
a rabbit and something like a kangaroo, and a couple of round-bodied,
plump birds, almost as large as domestic hens. These they dressed,
with considerable distaste and a noticeable lack of skill.
"We'll get used to it pretty quick, Diana--also more expert," he said
when the task was done. "We now have raw material for bow-strings and
clothes, as well as food."
"The word 'raw' being heavily accented," Nadia declared, with a grimace.
"But how do we know that they're good to eat?"
"We'll have to eat 'em and see," he grinned. "I don't imagine that any
flesh is really poisonous, and we'll have to arrive at the ones we like
best by a process of trial and error. Well, here's your job--I'll get
busy on mine. Don't go more than a few hundred meters away and yell if
you get into a jam."
"There's a couple of questions I want to ask you. What makes it so
warm here, when the sun's so far away and Jupiter isn't supposed to be
radiating any heat? And how about time? It's twelve hours by my watch
since sunrise this morning, and it's still shining."
"As for heat, I've been wondering about that. It must be due to internal
heat, because even though Jupiter may be warm, or even hot, it certainly
isn't radiating much, since it has a temperature of minus two hundred at
the visible surface, which, of course, is the top of the atmosphere. Our
heat here is probably caused by radioactivity--that's the most modern
dope, I believe. As for time, it looks as though our days were something
better than thirty hours long, instead of twenty-four. Of course I'll
keep the chronometer going on I-P time, since we'll probably need it in
working out observations; but we might as well let our watches run down
and work, eat, and sleep by the sun--not much sense in trying to keep
Tellurian time here, as I see it. Check?"
"All x. I'll have supper ready for you at sunset. 'Bye!"
A few evenings later, when Stevens came in after his long day's work,
he was surprised to see Nadia dressed in a suit of brown coveralls and
high-laced moccasins.
"How do I look?" she asked, pirouetting gayly.
"Neat, but not gaudy," he approved. "That's good mole-skin--smooth,
soft, and tough. Where'd you make the raise? I didn't know we had
anything like that on board. What did you do for thread? You look like
a million dollars--you sure did a good job of fitting."
"I had to have something--what with all the thorns and brush, there was
almost more of me exposed than covered, and I was getting scratched up
something fierce. So I ripped up one of the space-suits, and found out
that there's enough cloth, fur, and leather in one of them to make six
ordinary suits, and thread by the kilometer. I was awfully glad to see
all that thread--I had an idea that I'd have to unravel my stockings or
something, but I didn't. Your clothes are getting pretty tacky, too, and
you're getting all burned with those hot coals and things. I'm going to
build you a suit out of leather for your blacksmithing activities."
"Fine business, ace! Then we can save what's left of our civilized
clothes for the return trip. What do we eat?"
"The eternal question of the hungry laboring man! I've got a roasted
bongo, a fried filamaloo bird, and a boiled warple for the meat dishes.
For vegetables, mashed hikoderms and pimola greens. Neocorn bread."
"Translate that, please, into terms of food."
"Translate it yourself, after you eat it. I changed the system on you
today. I've named all the things, so it'll be easier to keep track of
those we like and the ones we don't."
With appetites sharp-set by long hours of hard labor they ate heartily;
then, in the deepening twilight, they sat and talked in comradely
fashion while Stevens smoked one precious cigarette.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was not long until Nadia had her work well in hand. Game was
plentiful, and the fertile valley and the neighboring upland yielded
peculiar, but savory vegetable foods in variety and abundance; so that
soon she was able to spend some time with Stevens, helping him as much
as she could. Thus she came to realize the true magnitude of the task he
faced and the real seriousness of their position.
As Stevens had admitted before the work was started, he had known that
he had set himself a gigantic task, but he had not permitted himself to
follow, step by step, the difficulties that he knew awaited him. Now,
as the days stretched into weeks and on into months, he was forced to
take every laborious step, and it was borne in upon him just how nearly
impossible that Herculean labor was to prove--just how dependent any
given earthly activity is upon a vast number of others. Here he was
alone--everything he needed must be manufactured by his own hands, from
its original sources. He had known that progress would be slow and he
had been prepared for that; but he had not pictured, even to himself,
half of the maddening setbacks which occurred time after time because
of the crudity of the tools and equipment he was forced to use. All too
often a machine or part, the product of many hours of grueling labor,
would fail because of the lack of some insignificant thing--some item
so common as to be taken for granted in all terrestrial shops, but
impossible of fabrication with the means at his disposal. At such times
he would set his grim jaw a trifle harder, go back one step farther
toward the Stone Age, and begin all over again--to find the necessary
raw material or a possible substitute, and then to build the apparatus
and machinery necessary to produce the part he required. Thus the
heart-breaking task progressed, and Nadia watched her co-laborer become
leaner and harder and more desperate day by day, unable in any way to
lighten his fearful load.
In the brief period of rest following a noonday meal, Stevens lay prone
upon the warm, fragrant grass beside the "Forlorn Hope," but it was
evident to Nadia that he was not resting. His burned and blistered hands
were locked savagely behind his head, his eyes were closed too tightly,
and every tense line of his body was eloquent of a strain even more
mental than physical. She studied him for minutes, her fine eyes
clouded, then sat down beside him and put her hand upon his shoulder.
"I want to talk to you a minute, Steve," she said gently.
"All x, little fellow--but it might be just as well if you didn't touch
me. You see, I'm getting so rabid that I can't trust myself."
"That's exactly what I want to talk to you about." A fiery blush burned
through her deep tan, but her low, clear voice did not falter and her
eyes held his unflinchingly. "I know you better than you know yourself,
as I've said before. You are killing yourself, but it isn't the work,
frightfully hard and disheartening as it is, that is doing it--it's
your anxiety for me and the uncertainty of everything. You haven't been
able to rest because you have been raging and fuming so at unavoidable
conditions--you have been fighting _facts_. And it's all _so_ useless,
Steve, between you and me--everything would check out on zero if we'd
just come out into the open."
The man's gaunt frame seemed to stiffen even more rigidly.
"You've said altogether too much or else only half enough, Nadia. You
know, of course, that I've loved you ever since I got really to know
you--and that didn't take long. You know that I love you and you know
how I love you--with the real love that a man can feel for only one
woman and only once in his life; and you know exactly what we're up
against. Now that _does_ tear it--wide open!" he finished bitterly.
"No, it doesn't, at all," she replied, steadily. "Of course I know that
you love me, and I glory in it; and since you don't seem to realize
that I love you in exactly the same way, I'll tell you so. Love you!
Good heavens, Steve, I never dreamed that such a man as you are really
existed! But you're fighting too many things at once, and they're
killing you. And they're mostly imaginary, at that. Can't you see that
there's no need of uncertainty between you and me? That there is no need
of you driving yourself to desperation on my account? Whatever must be
is all x with me, Steve. If you can build everything you need, all well
and good. We'll be engaged until then, and our love will be open and
sweet. If worst comes to worst, so that we can neither communicate with
Brandon and Westfall nor leave here under our own power--even that is
nothing to kill ourselves about. And yes, I do know exactly what we
are facing. I have been prepared for it ever since I first saw what a
perfectly impossible thing you are attempting. You are trying to go from
almost the Age of Bronze clear up to year-after-next in a month or two.
Not one man in a million could have done as much in his lifetime as you
have done in the last few weeks, and I do not see how even you, with
what little you have to work with, can possibly build such things as
power-plants, transmitters, and ultra-radio stations. But what of
it? For the day that it becomes clear that we are to remain here
indefinitely; that day we will marry each other here, before God.
Look around at this beautiful country. Could there be a finer world
upon which to found a new race? When we decided to cut loose from the
_Arcturus_ I told you that I was with you all the way, and now I'll
repeat it, with a lot more meaning. No matter what it's like, Steve, no
matter where it leads to, I'm with you--_to--the--end--of--the--road_.
Here or upon Earth or anywhere in the Universe. I am yours for life and
for eternity."
  *  *  *  *  *
While she was speaking, the grim, strained lines upon Stevens' face
had disappeared, and as she fell silent he straightened up and gently,
tenderly, reverently he took her lithe body into his arms.
"You're right, sweetheart--everything _will_ check out on zero, to
nineteen decimals." He was a man transfigured. "I've been fighting
windmills and I've been scared sick--but how was I to think that a
wonder-girl like you could ever love a mutt like me? You certainly are
the gamest little partner a man ever had. You're the world's straightest
shooter, ace--you're a square brick if there ever was one. Your sheer
nerve in being willing to go the whole route makes me love you more than
ever, if such a thing can be possible, and it certainly puts a new face
on the whole cock-eyed Universe for me. However, I don't believe it
will come to that. After what you've just said, I sure will lick that
job, regardless of how many different factories it takes to make one
armature--I'll show that mess of scrap-iron what kind of trees make
shingles!"
The girl still in his arms, he rose to his feet and released her slowly,
reluctantly, unwilling ever to let her go. Then he shook himself, as
though an overwhelming burden had been lifted from his shoulders, and
laughed happily.
"See this cigarette?" he went on lightly. "The Last of the Mohicans.
I'm going to smoke it in honor of our engagement." He drew the fragrant
smoke deep into his lungs and frowned at her in mock seriousness.
"This would be a nice world to live on, of course, but the jobs here
are too darn steady. It also seems to be somewhat lacking in modern
conveniences, such as steel-mills and machine tools. Then, too, it is
just a trifle too far from the Royal and Ancient for you really to enjoy
living here permanently, and besides, I can't get my favorite brand
of cigarettes around here. Therefore, after due deliberation, I don't
believe we'll take the place--we'll go back to Tellus. Kiss me just once
more ace, and I'll make that job think a cyclone has struck it right on
the center of impact. Like Samuel Weller, or whoever it was, I'm clear
full of 'wigor, wim, and witality'!"
The specified kiss and several others duly delivered he strode blithely
away, and the little canyon resounded with the blows of his heavy sledge
as he attacked with renewed spirit the great forging, white-hot from his
soak-pit, which was to become the shaft of his turbo-alternator. Nadia
watched him for a moment, her very heart in her eyes, then picked up her
spanner and went after more steel, breathing a long and tremulous, but
supremely happy sigh.
CHAPTER IV
Ganymedean Life
Slow, hard, and disheartening as the work had been at first, Stevens
had never slackened his pace, and after a time, as his facilities
increased, the exasperating setbacks decreased in number and severity
and his progress became faster and faster. Large as the "Forlorn Hope"
was, space was soon at a premium, for their peculiarly-shaped craft
became a veritable factory, housing a variety of machinery and
equipment unknown in any single earthly industrial plant. Nothing
was ornamental--everything was stripped to its barest fundamental
necessities--but every working part functioned with a smooth precision
to delight the senses of any good mechanic.
In a cavern under the falls was the great turbine, to be full-fed by the
crude but tight penstock which clung to the wall of the gorge, angling
up to the brink of that stupendous cataract. Bedded down upon solid
rock there was a high-tension alternator capable of absorbing the entire
output of the mighty turbine. This turbo-alternator was connected to
a set of converters from which the energy would flow along three great
copper cables--the receptors of the lifeboats being altogether too small
to carry the load--to the now completely exhausted accumulators of the
"Forlorn Hope." All high-tension apparatus was shielded and grounded,
so that no stray impulses could reveal to the possible detectors of
the Jovians the presence of this foreign power plant. Housings, frames,
spiders, all stationary parts were rough, crude and massive; but
bearings, shafts, armatures, all moving parts, were of a polished
and finished accuracy and balance that promised months and years of
trouble-free operation. Everything ready for the test, Stevens took off
his frayed and torn leather coveralls and moccasins and climbed nimbly
up the penstock. He never walked down. Opening the head-gate, he poised
sharply upon its extremity and took off in a perfect swan-dive; floating
unconcernedly down toward that boiling maelstrom two hundred feel below.
He struck the water with a sharp, smooth "slup!" and raced ashore,
seizing his suit as he ran toward the turbo-alternator. It was running
smoothly, and, knowing that everything was tight at the receiving end,
he lingered about the power plant until he was assured that nothing
would go wrong and that his home manufactured lubricating oil and grease
would keep those massive bearings cool.
Hunger assailed him, and glancing at the sun, he noted that it was well
past dinner-time.
"Wow!" he exclaimed aloud. "The boss just loves to wait meals--she'll
burn me up for this!"
He ran lightly toward "home," eager to tell his sweetheart that the
long awaited moment had arrived--that power was now flowing into their
accumulators.
"Hi, Diana of the silver bow!" he called. "How come you no blow the
dinner bell? Power's on--come give it a look!"
There was no answer to his hail, and Stevens paused in shocked
amazement. He knew that never of her own volition would she be out so
late--Nadia was gone! A rapid tour of inspection quickly confirmed that
which he already knew only too well. Forgotten was his hunger, forgotten
the power plant, forgotten everything except the fact that his Nadia,
the buoyant spirit in whom centered his Universe, was lost or ... he
could not complete the thought, even to himself.
Swiftly he came to a decision and threw off his suit, revealing the
body of a Hercules--a body ready for any demand he could put upon it.
Always in hard training, months of grinding physical labor and of heavy
eating had built him up to a point at which he would scarcely have
recognized himself, could he have glanced into a mirror. Mighty but
pliable muscles writhed and swelled under his clear skin as he darted
here and there, selecting equipment for what lay ahead of him. He donned
the heavily armored space-suit which they had prepared months before,
while they were still suspicious of possible attack. It was covered with
heavy steel at every point, and the lenses of the helmet, already of
unbreakable glass, had been re-enforced with thick steel bars. Tank and
valves supplied air at normal pressure, so that his powerful body could
function at full efficiency, not handicapped by the lighter atmosphere
of Ganymede. The sleeves terminated in steel-protected rubber wristlets
which left his hands free, yet sheltered from attack--wristlets tight
enough to maintain the difference in pressure, yet not tight enough
to cut off the circulation. He took up his mighty war-bow and the full
quiver of heavy arrows--full-feathered and pointed with savagely barbed,
tearing heads of forged steel--and slipped into their sheaths the long
and heavy razor-sharp sword and the double-edged dirk, which he had
made and ground long since for he knew not what emergency, and whose
bell-shaped hilts of steel further protected his hands and wrists.
Thus equipped, he had approximately his normal earthly weight; a fact
which would operate to his advantage, rather than otherwise, in case
of possible combat. With one last look around the "Forlorn Hope," whose
every fitting spoke to him of the beloved mistress who was gone, he
filled a container with water and cooked food and opened the door.
  *  *  *  *  *
"It won't be long now; now it won't be long." Nadia caroled happily,
buckling on her pack straps and taking up bow and arrows for her daily
hunt. "I never thought that he could do it, but what it takes to do
things, he's got lots of," she continued to improvise the song as she
left the "Hope" with its multitudinous devices whose very variety was
a never-failing delight to her; showing as it did the sheer ability of
the man, whose brain and hands had almost finished a next-to-impossible
task.
Through the canyon and up a well-worn trail she climbed, and soon came
out upon the sparsely timbered bench that was her hunting grounds. Upon
this day, however, she was full of happy anticipation and her mind was
everywhere except upon her work. She was thinking of Stevens, of their
love, of the power which he might turn on that very day, and of the
possible rescue for which she had hitherto scarcely dared to hope.
Thus it was that she walked miles beyond her usual limits without
having loosed an arrow, and she was surprised when she glanced up at
the sun to see that half the morning was gone and that she was almost
to the foothills, beyond which rose a towering range of mountains.
"Snap out of it, girl!" she reprimanded herself. "Go on wool-gathering
like this and your man will go hungry--and he'll break you right off
at the ankles!" She became again the huntress, and soon saw an animal
browsing steadily along the base of a hill. It was a six-legged,
deer-like creature, much larger than anything she had as yet seen. But
it was meat and her time was short, therefore she crept within range
and loosed an arrow with the full power of her hunting bow. Unfamiliar
as she was with the anatomy of the peculiar creature, the arrow did
not kill. The "hexaped," as she instantly named it, sped away and she
leaped after it. She, like her companion, had developed amazingly in
musculature, and few indeed were the denizens of Ganymede, who could
equal her speed upon that small globe, with its feeble gravitational
force.
Up the foothills it darted. Beyond the hills and deep into a valley
between two towering peaks the chase continued before Nadia's third
arrow brought the animal down. Bending over the game, she became
conscious of a strange but wonderful sweet perfume and glanced up,
to see something which she certainly had not noticed when the hexaped
had fallen. It was an enormous flower, at least a foot in diameter and
indescribably beautiful in its crimson and golden splendor. Almost level
with her head the gorgeous blossom waved upon its heavy stem; based
by a massive cluster of enormous, smooth, dark green leaves. Entranced
by this unexpected and marvelous floral display, Nadia breathed deeply
of the inviting fragrance--and collapsed senseless upon the ground.
Thereupon the weird plant moved over toward her, and the thick leaves
began to enfold her knees. This carnivorous thing, however, did not like
the heavy cloth of her suit and turned to the hexaped. It thrust several
of its leaves into the wounds upon the carcass and fed, while two other
leaves rasped together, sending out a piercing call.
In answer to the sound the underbrush crackled, and through it and upon
the scene there crashed a vegetable-animal nightmare--the parent of the
relatively tiny thing whose perfume had disabled the girl.
Its huge and gorgeous blossom was supported by a long, flexible,
writhing stem, and its base was composed of many and highly specialized
leaves. There were saws and spears and mighty, but sinuous tendrils;
there were slender shoots which seemed to possess some sense of
perception; there was the massive tractor base composed of extensible
leaves which by their contraction and expansion propelled the mass along
the ground. Parent and child fell upon the hexaped and soon bones and
hair were all that remained The slender shoots then wandered about the
unconscious girl in her strange covering, and as a couple of powerful
tendrils coiled about her and raised her into the air over the monstrous
base of the thing, its rudimentary brain could almost be perceived
working as it sluggishly realized that, now full fed, it should carry
this other victim along, to feed its other offspring when they should
return to its side.
  *  *  *  *  *
Barely outside the door of the "Forlorn Hope" Stevens whirled about
with a bitter imprecation. He had already lost time needlessly--with a
lookout plate he could cover more ground in ten minutes than he could
cover afoot in a week. He flipped on the power and shot the violet beam
out over the plateau to the district where he knew Nadia was wont to
hunt. Not finding her there, he swung the beam in an ever widening
circle around that district. Finally he saw a few freshly broken twigs,
and scanned the scene with care. He soon found the trail of fresh
blood which marked the path of the flight of the hexaped, and with the
peculiar maneuverability of the device he was using, it was not long
until he was studying the scene where the encounter had taken place.
He gasped when he saw the bones and perceived three of Nadia's arrows,
but soon saw that the skeleton was not human and was reassured. Casting
about in every direction, he found Nadia's bow, and saw a peculiar,
freshly trampled path leading from the kill, past the bow, down the
valley. He could not understand the spoor, but it was easily followed,
and he shot the beam along it at headlong speed until he came up with
the monstrous creature that was making it--until he saw what burden that
organism was carrying.
He leaped to the controls of the lifeboat, then dropped his hand. While
the stream of power now flowing was ample to operate the lookout plates,
yet it would be many hours before the accumulator cells would be in
condition to drive the craft even that short distance.
"It'll take over an hour to get there--here's hoping I can check in all
x," he muttered savagely, as he took careful note of the location and
direction of the creature's trail and set off at a fast jog-trot.
The carnivorous flower's first warning that all was not well was
received when Stevens' steel-shod feet landed squarely upon its base
and one sweeping cut of his sword lopped off the malignant blossom and
severed the two tendrils that still held the unconscious Nadia. With a
quick heave of his shoulder, he tossed her lightly backward into the
smooth-beaten track the creature had made and tried to leap away--but
the instant he had consumed in rescuing the girl had been enough for the
thing to seize him, and he found himself battling for his very life. No
soft-leaved infant this, but a full-grown monster, well equipped with
mighty weapons of offense and defense. Well it was for the struggling
man that he was encased in armor steel as those saw-edged, hard-spiked
leaves drove against him with crushing force; well it was for him that
he had his own independent air supply, so that that deadly perfume
eddied ineffective about his helmeted head! Hard and fiercely driven as
those terrible thorns were, they could do no more than dent his heavy
armor. His powerful left arm, driving the double-razor-edged dirk in
short, resistless arcs, managed to keep the snaky tendrils from coiling
about his right arm, which was wielding the heavy, trenchant sword.
Every time that mighty blade descended it cleaved its length through
snapping spikes and impotently grinding leaves; but more than once
a flailing tendril coiled about his neck armor and held his helmet
immovable as though in a vise, while those frightful, grinding saws
sought to rip their way through the glass to the living creature inside
the peculiar metal housing. Dirk and saber and magnificent physique
finally triumphed, but it was not until each leaf was literally severed
from every other leaf that the outlandish organism gave up the ghost.
  *  *  *  *  *
Nadia had been tossed out into pure air, beyond the zone of the
stupefying perfume, and she recovered her senses in time to see the
finish of the battle. Stevens, assured that his foe was _hors du
combat_, turned toward the spot where he had thrown Nadia's body. He saw
that she was unharmed, and sprang toward her in relief. He was surprised
beyond measure, however, to see her run away at a pace he could not hope
to equal, encumbered as he was; motioning frantically at him the while
to keep away from her. He stopped, astounded, and started to unscrew his
helmet, whereupon she dashed back toward him, signaling him emphatically
to leave his armor exactly as it was. He stood still and stared at her,
an exasperated question large upon his face, until she made clear to
him that he was to follow her at a safe distance, then she set off at a
rapid walk. She led him back to where the hexaped had fallen, where she
retrieved her bow and arrows; then, keeping a sharp lookout upon all
sides, she went on to a small stream of water. She made the dumbfounded
man go out into the middle of the creek and lie down and roll over
in the water, approaching him sniffing cautiously between immersions.
She made him continue the bathing until she could detect not even the
slightest trace of the sweet, but noxious fragrance of that peculiarly
terrible form of Ganymedean life. Only then did she allow him to remove
his helmet, so that she could give him the greeting for which they both
had longed and tell him what it was all about.
"So that's it, ace!" he exclaimed, still holding her tightly in his iron
embrace. "Great balls of fire! I thought maybe you were still a little
cuckoo. Anaesthetic perfume, huh? Hot stuff, I'd say--no wonder you
bit--I would, too. It's lucky for us I was air-tight--we'd both be
fee...."
"Stop it!" she interrupted him sharply, "Forget it--don't ever even
think of it!"
"All x, ace. It's out like the well known light. What to do? It's
getting darker than a hat, and we're a long way from home. Don't know
whether I could find my way back in the dark or not; and just between
you and me, I'm not particularly keen on night travel in these parts
after what's just happened. Are you?"
"Anything else but," she assured him, fervently. "I'd lots rather stay
hungry until tomorrow."
"No need of that--I've brought along enough supper for both of us. I'm
hungry as a wolf, too, now that I have time to think of it. We'll eat
and den up somewhere--or climb a tree. Those wampuses probably can't
climb trees!"
"There's a nice little cave back there about a hundred meters. We'll
pretend it's the Ritz," and they soon had a merry fire blazing in front
of the retreat. There they ate of the provisions Stevens had brought.
Then, while the man rolled up boulders before the narrow entrance of
the cave, Nadia gathered leaves and made a soft bed upon its warm,
dry floor.
"Good night, lover," and the girl, untroubled and secure now that
Stevens was at her side, was almost instantly asleep; but the man was
not sleepy. He thought of the power plant, even now sending its terrific
stream of energy into his accumulators. He thought of the ultra
radio--where could he get all the materials needed? He thought of his
friends, wondering whether or not they would receive his message. He
thought of Breckenridge and the other human beings who had been aboard
the _Arcturus_, wondering poignantly as to their fate. He thought of
Newton and of his own people, who had certainly given them up for dead
long since.
But above all he thought of the beautiful, steel-true companion lying
there asleep at his mailed feet, and he gazed down at her, his heart in
his eyes. The firelight shone through the chinks between the boulders,
casting a flickering ruddy light throughout the little cavern. Nadia lay
there her head pillowed upon one strong, brown little hand. Her lips
were red and sweetly curved, her cheek was smooth and firm as so much
brown velvet. She was literally aglow with sheer beauty and with perfect
health; and the man reflected, as he studied her hungrily, that this
wild life certainly had agreed with her--she was becoming more
surpassingly beautiful with every passing day.
"You little trump--you wonderful, lovely, square little brick!" he
breathed silently, and bent over to touch her cheek lightly with his
lips. Slight as the caress was, it disturbed her, and even in her sleep
her subconscious mind sent out an exploring hand, to touch her Steve and
thus be reassured. He pressed her hand and she settled back comfortably,
with a long, deep breath; and he stretched his iron-clad length beside
her and closed his eyes, firmly resolved not to waste a minute of this
wonderful night in sleep.
When he opened them an instant later, it was broad daylight, the
boulders had been rolled away, the fragrance of roasting meat permeated
the atmosphere, and Nadia was making a deafening clamor, beating his
steel breastplate lustily with the flat of his huge saber.
"Daylight in the swamp, you sleeper!" she exclaimed. "Roll out or roll
up! Come and get it, before I throw it away!"
"I must have been kind of tired," he said sheepishly, when he saw that
she had shot a bird and had cooked breakfast for them both while he had
been buried in oblivion.
"Peculiar, too, isn't it?" Nadia asked, pointedly. "You only did
about ten days' work yesterday in ten minutes, swinging this frightful
snickersnee of yours. Why, you played with it as though it were a
knitting-needle, and when I wanted to wake you up with it, I could
hardly lift it."
"Thought you didn't want that subject even mentioned?" he tried to steer
the talk away from his prowess with the broadsword.
"That was yesterday," airily. "Besides, I don't mind talking about
you--it's thinking about us being ... you know ... that I can't stand."
"All x, ace. I get you right. Let's eat."
  *  *  *  *  *
Breakfast over, they started down the valley, Stevens carrying his
helmet under his arm. Hardly had they started however, than Nadia's keen
eyes saw a movement through the trees, and, she stopped and pointed.
Stevens looked once, then hand in hand they dashed back to their cave.
"We'll pile up some of the boulders and you lie low," he instructed her
as he screwed on his helmet. She snapped open his face-plate.
"But what about you? Aren't you coming in, too?" she demanded.
"Can't--they'd surround us and starve us out. I'm safe in this
armor--thank Heaven we made it as solid as we did--and I'll fight 'em in
the open. I'll show 'em what the bear did to the buckwheat!"
"All right, I guess, but I wish I had my armor, too," she mourned as he
snapped shut his plate and walled her into the cave with the same great
rocks he had used the night before. Then, Nadia safe from attack, he
drew his quiver of war-arrows into position over his shoulder, placed
one at the ready on his bow-string and turned to face the horde of
things rushing up the valley toward him. Wild animals he had supposed
them, but as he stood firm and raised his weapon shrill whistles
sounded in the throng, and he gasped as he realized that those frightful
creatures must be intelligent beings, for not only did they signal
to each other, but he saw that they were armed with bows and arrows,
spears, and slings!
Six-limbed creatures they were, of a purplish-red color, with huge,
tricornigerous heads and with staring, green, phosphorescent eyes. Two
of the six limbs were always legs, two always arms; the intermediate
two, due to a mid-section jointing of the six-foot-long, almost
cylindrical body, could be used at will as either legs or arms. Now, out
of range, as they supposed, they halted and gathered about one who was
apparently their leader; some standing erect and waving four hands while
shaking their horns savagely in Stevens' direction, others trotting
around on four legs, busily gathering stones of suitable size for their
vicious slings.
Too far away to use their own weapons and facing only one small
four-limbed creature, they considered their game already in the bag, but
they had no comprehension of earthly muscles, nor any understanding of
the power and range of a hundred-pound bow driving a steel-headed war
arrow. Thus, while they were arguing, Stevens took the offensive, and
a cruelly barbed steel war-head tore completely through the body of
their leader and mortally wounded the creature next beyond him. Though
surprised, they were not to be frightened off, but with wild, shrill
screams rushed to the attack. Stevens had no ammunition to waste, and
every time that mighty bow twanged a yard-long arrow transfixed at least
one of the red horde--and a body through which had torn one of those
ghastly, hand-forged arrow-heads was of very little use thereafter.
Accurately-sped arrows splintered harmlessly against the re-enforced
windows of his helmet and against the steel guards protecting his hands.
He was almost deafened by the din as the stone missiles of the slingers
rebounded from his reverberating shell of steel, but he fired carefully,
steadily, and powerfully until his last arrow had been loosed. Then,
the wicked dirk in his left hand and the long and heavy saber weaving
a circular path of brilliance in the sun, he stepped forward a couple
of paces to meet the attackers. For a few moments nothing could stand
before that fiercely driven blade--severed heads, limbs, and fragments
of torsos literally filled the air, but sheer weight of numbers
bore him down. As he fell, he saw the white shaft of one of Nadia's
hunting-arrows flash past his helmet and bury itself to the flock in
the body of one of the horde above him. Nadia knew that her arrows could
not harm her lover, and through a chink between two boulders she was
shooting into the thickest of the mob speeding her light arrows with
the full power of her bow.
Though down, the savages soon discovered that Stevens was not out. In
such close quarters he could not use his sword, but the fourteen-inch
blade of the dirk, needle-pointed as it was and with two razor-sharp,
serrated cutting edges, was itself no mean weapon, and time after time
he drove it deep, taking life at every thrust. Four more red monsters
threw themselves upon the prostrate man, but not sufficiently versed in
armor to seek out its joints, their fierce short spear thrusts did no
damage. Presently four more corpses lay still and Stevens, with his,
to them incredible, earthly strength, was once more upon his feet in
spite of their utmost efforts to pinion his mighty limbs, and was again
swinging his devastating weapon. Half their force lying upon the field,
wiped out by a small, but invincible and apparently invulnerable being,
the remainder broke and ran, pursued by Stevens to the point where the
red monsters had first halted. He recovered his arrows and returned to
the cave, opening his face-plate as he came.
"All x, sweetheart?" he asked, rolling away the boulders. "Didn't get
anything through to you, did they?"
"No, they didn't even realize that I was taking part in the battle, I
guess. Did they hurt you while they had you down? I was scared to death
for a minute."
"No, the old armor held. One of them must have gnawed on my ankle
some, between the greave and the heel-plate, but he couldn't quite get
through. 'Sa darn small opening there, too--must have bent my foot
'way around to get in at all. Have to tighten that joint up a little,
I guess. I'll bet I've got a black spot and blue spot there the size of
my hand--maybe it's only the size of yours, though."
"You won't die of that, probably. Heavens, Steve, that cleaver of yours
is a frightful thing in action! Suppose it's safe for us to go home?"
"Absolutely--right now is the best chance we'll ever have, and something
tells me that we'd better make it snappy. They'll be back, and next time
they won't be so easy to take."
"All x, then--hold me, Steve, I can't stand the sight of that---let
alone wade through it. I'm going to faint or something, sure."
"As you were!" he snapped. "You aren't going to pass out now that it's
all over! It's a pretty ghastly mess, I know, but shut your eyes and
I'll carry you out of sight."
"Aren't we out of sight of that place yet?" she demanded after a time.
"I have been for quite a while," he confessed, "but you're sitting
pretty, aren't you? And you aren't very heavy--not here on Ganymede,
anyway!"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Put me down!" she commanded. "After that crack I won't play with you
any more at all--I'll pick up my marbles and go home!"
He released her and they hurried hack toward their waterfall, keeping
wary eyes sharp-set for danger in any form, animal or vegetable. On the
way back across the foothills Stevens shot another hexaped, and upon the
plateau above the river Nadia bagged several birds and small animals,
but it was not until they were actually in their own little canyon that
their rapid pace slackened and their vigilance relaxed.
"After this, ace, we hunt together and we go back to wearing armor while
we're hunting. It scared me out of a year's growth when you checked
up missing."
"We sure do, Steve," she concurred emphatically. "I'm not going to get
more than a meter away from you from now on. What do you suppose those
horrible things are?"
"Which?"
"Both."
"Those flowers aren't like anything Tellus ever saw, so we have no basis
of comparison. They may be a development of a flycatching plant, or they
may be a link between the animal and the vegetable kingdom. However,
we don't intend to study 'em, so let's forget 'em. Those animals were
undoubtedly intelligent beings; they probably are a race of savages of
this satellite."
"Then the really civilized races are probably...."
"Not necessarily--there may well be different types, each struggling
toward civilization. They certainly are on Venus, and they once were on
Mars."
"Why haven't we seen anything like that before, in all these months?
Things have been so calm and peaceful that we thought we had the whole
world to ourselves, as far as danger or men were concerned."
"We never saw them before because we never went where they lived--you
were a long ways from your usual stamping-grounds, you know. That
animal-vegetable flower is probably a high-altitude organism, living
in the mountains and never coming as low as we are down here. As for
the savages--whatever they are--they probably never come within five
kilometers of the falls. Many primitive peoples think that waterfalls
are inhabited by demons, and maybe these folks are afflicted the same
way."
"We don't know much about our new world yet, do we?"
"We sure don't--and I'm not particularly keen on finding out much more
about it until we get organized for trouble, either. Well, here we
are--just like getting back home to see the 'Hope,' isn't it?"
"It _is_ home, and will be until we get one of our own on earth," and
after Stevens had read his meters, learning with satisfaction that the
full current was still flowing into the accumulators, he began to cut
up the meat.
"Now that you've got the power-plant running at last, what next?" asked
Nadia, piling the cuts in the freezer.
"Brandon's ultra-radio comes next, but it's got more angles to it than
a cubist's picture of a set of prisms; so many that I don't know where
to begin. There, that job's done--let's sit down and I'll talk at you
awhile. Maybe between us we can figure out where to start. I've got
everything to build it lined up except for the tube, but that's got me
stopped cold. You see, fields of force are all right in most places, but
I've got to have one tube, and it's got to have the hardest possible
vacuum. That means a mercury-vapor super pump. Mercury is absolutely
the only thing that will do the trick and the mercury is one thing
that is conspicuous by its absence in these parts. So are tungsten for
filaments, tantalum for plates, and platinum for leads; and I haven't
found anything that I can use as a getter, either--a metal, you know, to
flash inside the tube to clean up the last traces of atmosphere in it."
"I didn't suppose that such a simple thing as a radio tube could hold
you up, after the perfectly unbelievable things that you have done
already--but I see now how it could. Of course, the tubes in our
receiver over there are too small?"
"Yes, they are only receiver and communicator tubes, and I need a
high-power transmitting tube--a fifty-kilowatter, at least. I'd give
my left leg to the knee joint for one of those big water-cooled,
sixty-kilowatt ten-nineteens right now--it would save us a lot of
grief."
"Maybe you could break up those tubes and use the plates and so on?"
"I thought of that, but it won't work--there isn't half enough metal
in the lot, and the filaments in particular are so tiny that I couldn't
possibly work them over into a big one. Then, too, we haven't got
many spare tubes, and if I smash the ones we're using, I put our
communicators out of business for good, so that we can't yell for help
if we have to drift home--and I still don't get any mercury."
"Do you mean to tell me there's no mercury on this whole planet?"
"Not exactly; but I do mean that I haven't been able to find any, and
that it's probably darned scarce. And since all the other metals I want
worst are also very dense and of high atomic weight, they're probably
mighty scarce here, too. Why? Because we're on a satellite, and no
matter what hypothesis you accept for the origin of satellites, you come
to the same conclusion--that heavy metals are either absent or most
awfully scarce and buried deep down toward the center. There are lots of
heavy metals in Jupiter somewhere, but we probably couldn't find them.
Jupiter's atmosphere is one mass of fog, and we couldn't see, since we
haven't got an infra-red transformer. I could build one, in time, but
it would take quite a while--and we couldn't work on Jupiter, anyway,
because of its gravity and probably because of its atmosphere. And even
if we could work there, we don't want to spend the rest of our lives
prospecting for mercury." Stevens fell silent, brow wrinkled in thought.
"You mean, dear, that we're..." Nadia broke off, the sentence
unfinished.
"Gosh, no! There's lots of things not tried yet, and we can always set
out to drift it. I was thinking only of building the tube. And I'm
trying to think ... say, Nadia, what do you know about Cantrell's
Comet?"
"Not a thing, except that I remember reading in the newspapers that it
was peculiar for something or other. But what has Cantrell's Comet got
to do with the high cost of living--or with radio tubes? Have you gone
cuckoo all of a sudden?"
"You'll be surprised!" Stevens grinned at her puzzled expression.
"Cantrell's Comet is one of Jupiter's comet family and is peculiar in
being the most massive one known to science. It was hardly known until
after they built those thousand-foot reflectors on the Moon, where the
seeing is always perfect, but it has been studied a lot since then.
Its nucleus is small, but extremely heavy--it seems to have an average
density of somewhere around sixteen. There's platinum and everything
else that's heavy there, girl! They ought to be there in such quantity
that even such a volunteer chemist as I am could find them!"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Heavens, Steve!" A look of alarm flashed over Nadia's face, then
disappeared as rapidly as it had come into being. "But of course, comets
aren't really dangerous."
"Sure not. A comet's tail, which so many people are afraid of as being
poison gas, is almost a perfect vacuum, even at its thickest, and we'd
have to wear space-suits anyway. And speaking of vacuum ... whoopee!
We don't need mercury any more than a goldfish needs a gas-mask. When
we get Mr. Tube done, we'll take him out into space, leaving his mouth
open, and very shortly he'll be as empty as a flapper's skull. Then
we'll seal him up, flash him out, come back here, and start spilling
our troubles into Brandon's shell-like ear!"
"Wonderful, Steve! You do get an idea occasionally, don't you? But how
do we get out there? Where is this Cantrell's Comet?"
"I don't know, exactly--there's one rub. Another is that I haven't
even started the transmitter and receptor units. But we've got some
field-generators here on board that I can use, so it won't be so bad.
And our comet is in this part of the solar system somewhere fairly
close. Wish we had an Ephemeris, a couple of I-P solar charts, and
a real telescope."
"You can't do much without an Ephemeris, I should think. It's a good
thing you kept the chronometers going. You know the I-P time, day, and
dates, anyway."
"I'll have to do without some things, that's all," and the man stared
absently at the steel wall. "I remember something about its orbit, since
it is one thing that all I-P vessels have to steer clear of. Think I can
figure it close enough so that we'll be able to find it in our little
telescope, or even on our plate, since we'll be out of this atmosphere.
And it might not be a bad idea for us to get away, anyway. I'm afraid of
those folks on that space-ship, whoever they were, and they must live
around here somewhere. Cantrell's Comet swings about fifty million
kilometers outside Jupiter's orbit at aphelion--close enough for us to
reach, and yet probably too far for them to find us easily. By the time
we get back here, they probably will have quit looking for us, if they
look at all. Then too, I expect these savages to follow us up. What say,
little ace--do we try it or do we stay here?"
"You know best, Steve. As I said before, I'm with you from now on, in
whatever you think best to do. I know that you think it best to go out
there. Therefore, so do I."
"Well," he said, finally, "I'd better get busy, then--there's a lot to
do before we can start. The radio doesn't come next, after all--the
transmitter and receptor units come ahead of it. They won't mean
wasted labor, in any event, since we'll have to have them in case the
radio fails. You'd better lay in a lot of supplies while I'm working
on that stuff, but don't go out of sight, and yell like fury if
you see anything. We'd both better wear full armor every time we go
out-of-doors--unless I'm all out of control we aren't done with those
savages yet. Even though they may be afraid of the demons of the falls,
I think they'll have at least one more try at us."
While Nadia brought in meat and vegetables and stored them away,
Stevens attacked the problem of constructing the pair of tight-beam,
auto-dirigible transmitter and receptor units which would connect his
great turbo-alternator to the accumulators of their craft, wherever it
might be in space. From the force-field generators of the "Forlorn Hope"
he selected the two most suitable for his purpose, tuned them to the
exact frequency he required, and around them built a complex system of
condensers and coils.
Day after day passed. Their larder was full, the receptor was finished,
and the beam transmitter was almost ready to attach to the
turbo-alternator before the calm was broken.
"Steve!" Nadia shrieked. Glancing idly into the communicator plate, she
had been perfunctorily surveying the surrounding territory. "They're
coming! Thousands of them! They're all over the bench up there, and just
simply pouring down the hills and up the valley!"
"Wish they'd waited a few hours longer--we'd have been gone. However,
we're just about ready for them," he commented grimly, as he stared over
her shoulder into the communicator plate. "We'll make a lot of those
Indians wish that they had stayed at home with their papooses."
"Have you got all those rays and things fixed up?"
"Not as many as I'd like to have. You see, I don't know the composition
of the I-P ray, since it is outlawed to everybody except the police.
Of course I could have found out from Brandon, but never paid any
attention to it. I've got some nice ultra-violet, though, and a short-wave
oscillatory that'll cook an elephant to a cinder in about eight seconds.
We'll keep them amused, no fooling! Glad we had time to cover our open
sides, and it looks as though that meteorite armor we put over the
projectors may be mighty useful, too."
On and on the savages came, massed in formations showing some signs of
rude discipline. This time there was neither shrieking nor yelling; the
weird creatures advanced silently and methodically. Here and there were
massed groups of hundreds, dragging behind them engines which Stevens
studied with interest.
"Hm ... m ... m. Catapults," he mused. "You were right, girl of my
dreams--armor and bows and arrows wouldn't help us much right now.
They're going to throw rocks at us that'll have both mass and momentum.
With those things they can cave in our side-armor, and might even dent
our roof. When one of those projectiles hits, we want to know where it
ain't, that's all."
Stevens cast off the heavily-insulated plug connecting the power plant
leads to his now almost fully charged accumulators, strapped himself and
Nadia into place at the controls, and waited, staring into the plate.
Catapult after catapult was dragged to the lip of the little canyon,
until six of them bore upon the target. The huge stranded springs of
hair, fiber, and sinew were wound up to the limit, and enormous masses
of rock were toilsomely rolled upon the platforms. Each "gunner" seized
his trip, and as the leader shrieked his signal the six ponderous masses
of metalliferous rock heaved into the air as one. But they did not
strike their objective, for as the signal was given, Stevens shot
power into his projectors. The "Forlorn Hope" leaped out of the canyon
and high into the air over the open meadow, just as the six great
projectiles crashed into the ground upon the spot which, an instant
before, she had occupied.
  *  *  *  *  *
Rudimentary discipline forgotten, the horde rushed down into the canyon
and the valley, in full clamor of their barbaric urgings. Horns and
arms tossed fiercely, savage noises rent the air, and arrows splintered
harmlessly upon steel plate as the mystified and maddened warriors upon
the plain below gave vent to their outraged feelings.
"Look, Nadia! A whole gang of them are smelling around that power plug.
Pretty soon somebody's going to touch a hot spot, and when he does,
we'll cut loose on the rest of them."
The huge insulating plug, housing the ends of the three great cables
leading to the converters of the turbo-alternator, lay innocently upon
the ground, its three yawning holes invitingly open to savage arms. The
chief, who had been inspecting the power-plant, walked along the triplex
lead and joined his followers at its terminus. Pointing with his horns,
he jabbered orders and three red monsters, one at each cable, bent to
lift the plug, while the leader himself thrust an arm into each of the
three contact holes. There was a flash of searing flame and the reeking
smoke of burning flesh--those three arms had taken the terrific no-load
voltage of the three-phase converter system, and the full power of the
alternator had been shorted directly to ground through the comparatively
small resistance of his body.
Stevens had poised the "Forlorn Hope" edgewise in mid-air, so that
the gleaming, heavily armored parabolic reflectors of his projectors,
mounted upon the leading edge of the fortress, covered the scene below.
As the charred corpse of the savage chieftain dropped to the ground,
it seemed to the six-limbed creatures that the demons of the falls had
indeed been annoyed beyond endurance by their intrusion; for, as if in
response to the flash of fire from the power plug, that structure so
peculiarly and so stolidly hanging in the air came plunging down toward
them. From it there reached down twin fans of death and destruction: one
flaming and almost invisibly incandescent violet which tore at the eyes
and excruciatingly disintegrated brain and nervous tissues; the other
dully glowing an equally invisible red, at the touch of which body
temperature soared to lethal heights and foliage burst cracklingly into
spontaneous flame.
In their massed hundreds, the savages dropped where they stood, life
rived away by the torturing ultra-violet, burned away by the blast
of pure heat, or consumed by the conflagrations that raged instantly
wherever that wide-sweeping fan encountered combustible material.
In the face of power supernatural they lost all thought of attack or of
conquest, and sought only and madly to escape. Weapons were thrown away,
the catapults were abandoned, and, every man for himself, the mob fled
in wildest disorder, each striving to put as much distance as possible
between himself and that place of dread mystery, the waterfall.
"Well, I guess that'll hold 'em for a while," Stevens dropped their
craft back into its original quarters in the canyon. "Whether they ever
believed before that this falls was inhabited by devils or not, they
think so now. I'll bet that it will be six hundred Jovian years before
any of them ever come within a hundred kilometers of it again. I'm glad
of it, too, because they'll let our power plant alone now. Well, let's
get going--we've got to make things hum for a while!"
"Why all the rush? You just said that we have scared them away for
good."
"The savages, yes, but not those others. We've just turned loose enough
radiation to affect detectors all over the system, and it's up to us to
get this beam projector set up, get away from here, and get our power
shut off before they can trace us. Snap it up, ace!"
The transmitter unit was installed at the converters, the cable was torn
out, and, having broken the last material link between it and Ganymede,
Stevens hurled the "Forlorn Hope" out into space, using the highest
acceleration Nadia could endure. Hour after hour the massive wedge of
steel bored outward, away from Jupiter; hour after hour Stevens' anxious
eyes scanned his instruments; hour after hour hope mounted and relief
took the place of anxiety as the screens remained blank throughout every
inquiring thrust into the empty ether. But they knew they would have to
keep sharp vigilance.
  *  *  *  *  *
_Continuing a Thrilling New Serial of Interplanetary Life and Travel
by Edward E. Smith, Ph.D._
_Author of "Skylark of Space," and "Skylark Three"_
PART II
Spacehounds of IPC
  _One of the most fascinating mysteries of the heavens is the comet.
  It goes through space, gets near enough to the earth to be seen,
  and then goes off and disappears in celestial distance. Often it
  has a hyperbolic orbit, which would make it impossible to come back.
  Yet it may return--apparently contradicting the geometry of conic
  sections. This only goes to prove once more that it is risky to say
  anything is impossible--even that our hero of this story manages
  beautifully, with the aid of Cantrell's Comet, to avoid complete
  annihilation while stranded in interstellar space._
  _Read "what went before" and then continue the second instalment._
What Went Before:
  The Interplanetary Vessel Arcturus sets out for Mars, with
  Breckenridge as chief pilot, carrying on board, besides its
  regular crew and some passengers, the famous Dr. Stevens,
  designer of space ships and computer. He checks computations
  made by astronomers stationed in floating observatories, and
  after he has located any trouble and suggests a plan for
  minimizing the hazards of the trip from the earth to Mars,
  he reports his findings and suggestions to Mr. Newton, chief
  of the Interplanetary Corporation.
  Stevens then takes Nadia, Mr. Newton's beautiful young daughter,
  on a specially conducted sight-seeing tour of the Arcturus and
  thoroughly explains to her all of the works of the vessel. Nadia
  has herself had a good science education. While they are down at
  the bottom of the ship--nearing the end of their tour--Stevens
  feels a barely perceptible movement of the vessel from its course.
  When he turns on the visiplate, he is horrified to find that a
  mysterious ray of unparalleled power has neatly sliced the Arcturus
  in several places.
  Nadia and Stevens are completely separated from the rest of the
  crew and passengers of the ship, so they get into a lifeboat,
  which is equipped for a limited amount of space travel. Despite
  the strict and apparently effective vigilance of the enemy
  destroyer, Stevens and Nadia make their getaway in the lifeboat,
  which they aptly call "Forlorn Hope," and finally make a safe
  landing on Ganymede, where Stevens plans to build a power-plant
  and a radio transmitter, to enable him to communicate with the
  earth or with the IPV Sirius, which is used by Westfall and Brandon
  (two of the world's best scientists) as a floating laboratory.
  With the very scant apparatus and material available, Stevens
  sets to work on his power plant. Just as they have it completed
  and ready to start for Cantrell's Comet, where Stevens believes
  he can obtain the necessary metal for his giant transmitting
  tube, they experience a close call with carnivorous plants on the
  satellite and later with savage inhabitants, which precipitates
  their trip to the comet.
CHAPTER V
Cantrell's Comet
Far out in space, Jupiter, a tiny moon and its satellites mere
pin-points of light, Stevens turned to his companion with a grin.
"Well, Nadia, old golf-shootist, here's where we turn spacehounds again.
Hope you like it better this time, because I'm afraid that we'll have to
stay weightless for quite a while." He slowly throttled down the mighty
flow of power, and watched the conflicting emotions play over Nadia's
face in her purely personal battle against the sickening sensations
caused by the decrease in their acceleration.
"I'm sorry as the dickens, sweetheart," he went on, tenderly, and the
grin disappeared. "Wish I could take it for you, but...."
"But there are times when we've got to fight our own battles and bury
our own dead," she interrupted, gamely. "Cut off the rest of that power!
I'm _not_ going to be sick--I _won't_ be a--what do you spacehounds call
us poor earth-bound dubs who can't stand weightlessness--weight-fiends,
isn't it?"
"Yes; but you aren't...."
"I know I'm not, and I'm not going to be one, either! I'm all x,
Steve--it's not so bad now, really. I held myself together that time,
anyway, and I feel lots better now. Have you found Cantrell's Comet yet?
And why so sure all of a sudden that they can't find us? That power beam
still connects us to Ganymede, doesn't it? Maybe they can trace it."
"At-a-girl, ace!" he cheered. "I'll tell the world you're no
weight-fiend--you're a spacehound right. Most first-trippers, at this
stage of the game, wouldn't be caring a whoop whether school kept or
not, and here you're taking an interest in all kinds of things already.
You'll do, girl of my heart--no fooling!"
"Maybe, and maybe you're trying to kid somebody," she returned, eyeing
him intently. "Or maybe you just don't want to answer those questions
I asked you a minute ago."
[Illustration: _At the bottom of a shaft a section of the rocky wall
swung aside, revealing the yawning black mouth of a horizontal tunnel.
At intervals upon its roof there winked into being almost invisible
points of light. Along that line of lights the life-boats felt their
way, coming finally into a huge cavern...._]
"No, that's straight data, right on zero across the panel," he assured
her. "And as for your questions, they're easy. No, I haven't looked for
the comet yet, because we'll have to drift for a couple of days before
we'll be anywhere near where I think it is. No, they can't trace us,
because there is now nothing to trace, unless they can detect the
slight power we are using in our lights and so on--which possibility is
vanishingly small. Potentially, our beam still exists, but since we are
drawing no power, it has no actual present existence. See?"
"Uh-uh," she dissented. "I can't say that I can quite understand how
a beam can exist potentially and yet not be there actually enough to
trace. Why, a thing has to be actual or not exist at all--you can't
possibly have something that is nothing. It doesn't make sense. But
lay off those integrations of yours, please," as now armed with a
slate-pencil, Stevens began to draw a diagram upon a four-foot sheet of
smooth slate. "You know that your brand of math is over my head like a
circus tent, so we'll let it lie. I'll take your word for it. Steve--if
you're satisfied, it's all x with me."
"I think I can straighten you out a little, by analogy. Here's a rough
sketch of a cylinder, with shade and shadow. You've had descriptive
geometry, of course, and so know that a shadow, being simply a
projection of a material object upon a plane, is a two-dimensional
thing--or rather, a two-dimensional concept. Now take the shade, which
is, of course, this entire figure here, between the cylinder casting
the shadow and the plane of projection. You simply imagine that there
is a point source of light at your point of projection: it isn't really
there. The shade, then, of which I am drawing a picture, has only a
potential existence. You know exactly where it is, you can draw it, you
can define it, compute it, and work with it--but still it doesn't exist;
there is absolutely nothing to differentiate it from any other volume of
air, and it cannot be detected by any physical or mechanical means. If,
however, you place a light at the point of projection, the shade becomes
actual and can be detected optically. By a sufficient stretch of the
imagination, you might compare our beam to that shade. When we turn our
power on, the beam is actual; it is a stream of tangible force, and as
such can be detected electrically. When our switches here are open,
however, it exists only potentially. There is no motion in the ether,
nothing whatever to indicate that a beam had ever actually existed
there. With me?"
"Floundering pretty badly, but I see it after a fashion. You physicists
are peculiar freaks--where we ordinary mortals see actual, solid,
heavy objects, you see only empty space with a few electrons and things
floating around in it; and yet where we see only empty space, you can
see things 'potentially' that may never exist at all. You'll be the
death of me yet, Steve! But I'm wasting a lot of time. What do we do
now?"
"We get busy on the big tube. You might warm up the annealing oven and
melt me that pot of glass, while I get busy on the filament supports,
plate brackets, and so on." Both fell to work with a will, and hours
passed rapidly and almost silently, so intent was each upon his own
tasks.
"All x, Steve." Nadia broke the long silence. "The pyrometer's on the
red, and the oven's hot," and the man left his bench. Taking up a long
paddle and an even longer blowpipe, he skimmed the melt to a dazzlingly
bright surface and deftly formed a bubble.
"I just love to talk at you when you've got your mouth full of a
blowpipe." Nadia eyed him impishly and tucked her feet beneath her,
poised weightless as she was. "I've got you foul now--I can say anything
I want to, and you can't talk back, because your bubble will lose its
shape if you do. Oh, isn't that a beauty! I never saw you blow anything
that big before," and she fell silent, watching intently.
Slowly there was being drawn from the pot a huge, tapering bulb of hot,
glistening glass, its cross-section at the molten surface varying as
Stevens changed the rate of draw or the volume of air blown through the
pipe. Soon that section narrowed sharply. The glass-blower waved his
hand and Nadia severed the form neatly with a glowing wire, just above
the fluid surface of the glass remaining in the pot. Pendant from the
blowpipe, the bulb was placed over the hot-bench, where Stevens, now
begoggled, begloved, and armed with a welding torch, proceeded to fuse
into the still, almost plastic, glass sundry necks, side-tubes, supports
and other attachments of peculiar pattern. Finally the partially
assembled tube was placed in the annealing oven, where it would remain
at a high and constant temperature until its filaments, grids, and
plates had been installed. Eventually, in that same oven, it would be
allowed to cool slowly and uniformly over a period of days.
  *  *  *  *  *
Thus were performed many other tasks which are ordinarily done either
by automatic machinery or by highly skilled specialists in labor--for
these two, thrown upon their own resources, had long since learned how
much specialization may be represented by the most commonplace article.
Whenever they needed a thing they did not have--which happened every
day--they had either to make it or else, failing in that, to go back and
build something that would enable them to manufacture the required item.
Such setbacks had become so numerous as to be expected as part of the
day's work; they no longer caused exasperation or annoyance. For two
days the two jacks-of-all-trades worked at many lines and with many
materials before Stevens called a halt.
"All x, Nadia. It's time for us to stop tinkering and turn into
astronomers. We've been out for fifty I-P hours, and we'd better begin
looking around for our heap of scrap metal," and, the girl at the
communicator plate and Stevens at their one small telescope, they began
to search the black, star-jeweled heavens for Cantrell's Comet.
"According to my figures, it ought to be about four hours right
ascension, and something like plus twenty degrees declination. My
figures aren't accurate, though, since I'm working purely from memory,
so we'd better cover everything from Aldebaran to the Pleiades."
"But the directions will change as we go along, won't they?"
"Not unless we pass it, because we're heading pretty nearly straight at
it, I think."
"I don't see anything interesting thereabouts except stars. Will it have
much tail?"
"Very little--it's close to aphelion, you know, and a comet doesn't have
much of a tail so far away from the sun. Hope it's got some of its tail
left, though, or we may miss it entirely."
Hours passed, during which the two observers peered intently into their
instruments, then Stevens left the telescope and went over to his slate.
"Looks bad, ace--we should have spotted it before this. Time to eat,
too. You'd better...."
"Oh, look here, quick!" Nadia interrupted. "Here's something! Yes, it
_is_ a comet, and quite close--it's got a little bit of a dim tail."
Stevens leaped to the communicator plate, and, blond head pressed close
to brown, the two wayfarers studied the faint image of the wanderer of
the void.
"That's it, I just _know_ it is!" Nadia declared. "Steve, as a computer,
you're a blinding flash and a deafening report!"
"Yeah--missed it only about half a million kilometers or so," he
replied, grinning, "and I'd fire a whole flock of I-P check stations
for being four thousand off. However, I could have done worse--I could
easily have forgotten all the data on it, instead of only half of it."
He applied a normal negative acceleration, and Nadia heaved a profound
sigh of relief as her weight returned to her and her body again became
manageable by the ordinary automatic and involuntary muscles.
"Guess I am a kind of a weight-fiend at that, Steve--this is much
better!" she exclaimed.
"Nobody denies that weight is more convenient at times; but you're a
spacehound just the same--you'll like it after a while," he prophesied.
Stevens took careful observations upon the celestial body, altered his
course sharply, then, after a measured time interval, again made careful
readings.
"That's it, all x," he announced, after completing his calculations, and
he reduced their negative acceleration by a third. "There--we'll be just
about traveling with it when we get there," he said. "Now, little K. P.
of my bosom, our supper's been on minus time for hours. What say we
shake it up?"
"I check you to nineteen decimals," and the two were soon attacking the
savory Ganymedean goulash which Nadia had put in the cooker many hours
before.
"Should we both go to sleep, Steve, or should one of us watch it?"
"Sleep, by all means. There's no meteoric stuff out here, and we won't
arrive before ten o'clock tomorrow, I-P time," and, tired out by the
events of the long day, man and maid sought their beds and plunged into
dreamless slumber.
While they slept, the "Forlorn Hope" drove on through the void at a
terrific but constantly decreasing velocity; and far off to one side,
plunging along a line making a sharp angle with their own course, there
loomed larger and larger the masses which made up the nucleus of
Cantrell's Comet.
Upon awakening, Stevens' first thought was for the comet, and he
observed it carefully before he aroused Nadia, who hurried into the
control room. Looming large in the shortened range of the plate, their
objective hurtled onward in its eternal course, its enormous velocity
betrayed only by the rapidity with which it sped past the incredibly
brilliant background of infinitely distant stars. Apparently it was
a wild jumble of separate fragments; a conglomerate, heterogeneous
aggregation of rough and jagged masses varying in size from grains of
sand up to enormous chunks, which upon Earth would have weighed millions
of tons. Pervading the whole nucleus, a slow, indefinite movement was
perceptible--a vague writhing and creeping of individual components
working and slipping past and around each other as they all rushed
forward in obedience to the immutable cosmic law of gravitation.
"Oh, isn't that wonderful!" Nadia breathed. "Think of actually going to
visit a comet! It sort of scares me, Steve--it's so creepy and crawly
looking. We're awfully close, aren't we?"
"Not so very. We'd probably have lots of time to eat breakfast. But just
to be on the safe side, maybe I'd better camp here at the board, and you
bring me over something to eat."
"All x, Chief!" and Stevens ate, one eye upon the screen, watching
closely the ever-increasing bulk of the comet.
  *  *  *  *  *
For many minutes he swung the _Forlorn Hope_ in a wide curve approaching
the mountain of metal ever and ever more nearly, then turned to the girl.
"Hold everything, Nadia--power's going off in a minute!" He shut off the
beam; then, noting that they were traveling a trifle faster than the
comet, he applied a small voltage to one dirigible projector. Darting
the beam here and there, he so corrected their flight that they were
precisely stationary in relation to the comet. He then opened his
switches, and the _Forlorn Hope_ hurtled on. Apparently motionless, it
was now a part of Cantrell's Comet, traveling in a stupendous, elongated
ellipse about the Master of our Solar System, the Sun.
"There, ace, who said anything about weight-fiends? I was watching you,
and you never turned a hair that time."
"Why, that's right--I never even thought about it--I was so busy
studying that thing out there! I suppose I've got used to it already?"
"Sure--you're one of us now. I knew you would be. Well, let's go places
and do things! You'd better put on a suit, too, so you can stand in the
air-lock and handle the line."
They donned the heavily insulated, heated suits, and Stevens snapped the
locking plugs of the drag line into their sockets upon the helmets.
"Hear me?" he asked. "Sound-disks all x?"
"All x."
"On the radio--all x?"
"All x."
"I tested your tanks and heaters--they're all x. But you'll have to
test...."
"I know the ritual by heart, Steve. It's been in every show in the
country for the last year, but I didn't know you had to go through it
every time you went out-of-doors! Halves, number one all x, two all x,
three all x...."
"Quit it!" he snapped. "You aren't testing those valves! That check-up
is no joke, guy. These suits are complicated affairs, and some parts
are apt to get out of order. You see, a thing to give you fresh air at
normal pressure and to keep you warm in absolute space can't be either
simple or fool-proof. They've worked on them for years, but they're
pretty crude yet. They're tricky, and if one goes sour on you, out in
space, it's just too bad--you're lucky to get back alive. A lot of men
are still out there somewhere because of the sloppy check-ups."
"'Scuse it, please--I'll be good," and the careful checking and testing
of every vital part of the space-suits went on.
Satisfied at last that the armor was spaceworthy, Stevens picked up the
coils of drag-line, built of a non-metallic fiber which could retain its
flexibility and strength in the bitter cold of outer space, and led the
girl into the air-lock.
"Heavens, Steve! It's perfectly stupendous, and grinding around worse
than the wreckage of the _Arcturus_ was when I wouldn't let you climb
up it--why, I thought comets were _little_, and hardly massive at all!"
exclaimed the girl.
"This is little, compared to any regular planet or satellite or even to
the asteroids. There's only a few cubic kilometers of matter there, and,
as I said before, it's a decidedly unusual comet. You know the game?"
"I've got it--and believe me, I'll yank you back here a lot faster than
you can jump over there if any one of those lumps starts to fall on you!
Is this drag line long enough?"
"Yes, I've got a hundred meters here, and it's only fifty meters over
there to where I'm going. So long," and with a light thrust of his feet,
he dove head foremost across the intervening space, a heavy pike held
out ahead of him. Straight as a bullet he floated toward his objective,
a jagged chunk many yards in diameter, taking the shock of his landing
by sliding along the pike-handle as its head struck the mass.
Then, bracing his feet against one lump, he pushed against its neighbor,
and under that steady pressure the enormous masses moved apart and kept
on moving, grinding among their fellows. Over and around them Stevens
sprang, always watching his line of retreat as well as that of his
advance, until his exploring pike struck a lump of apparently solid
metal. Hooking the fragment toward him, he thrust savagely with his
weapon and was reassured--that object was not only metal, but it was
metal so hard that his pike-head of space-tempered alloy steel did not
make an impression upon its surface. Turning on his helmet light he
swung his heavy hammer repeatedly but could not break off even a small
fragment.
"Found something, Steve?" Nadia's voice came clearly in his ears.
"I'll say I have! A hunk of solid, non-magnetic metal about the size of
an office desk. I can't break off any of it, so I guess we'll have to
grab the whole chunk."
He hitched the end of his cable around the nugget, made sure that the
loops would not slip, and then, as Nadia tightened the line, he shoved
mightily.
"All x, Nadia, she's coming! Pull in my drag line as I said over there,
and I'll help you land her."
Inside the _Forlorn Hope_ the mass of metal was urged into the shop,
where Stevens clamped it immovably to the steel floor, before he took
off his space-suit.
"Why, it's getting covered with snow, and the whole room is getting
positively _cold_!" Nadia exclaimed.
"Sure. Anything that comes in from space is cold, even if it's been out
only a few minutes, and that hunk of stuff has been out for nobody knows
how many million years. It didn't get much heat from the sun except
at perihelion, you know, so it's probably somewhere around minus two
hundred and sixty degrees now. I'll have to throw a heater on it for
half an hour before we can touch it. And since this is more or less new
stuff to you, I'll caution you--don't try to touch anything that has
just come in. That hammer or pike would freeze your hand instantly, even
though they've been out only a little while. Before you touch anything,
blow on it, like this, see? If your breath freezes solid on it, like
that, don't touch it--it's cold."
  *  *  *  *  *
Under the infra-beams of the heater, the mass of the metal was brought
to room temperature and Stevens attacked it with his machine tools.
Bit by bit the stubborn material was torn from the lump. Through heavy
goggles he watched the incandescent mass in a refractory crucible, in
the heart of the induction furnace.
"What do you think you've got--what you want?"
"I don't know. It wasn't iron--it wouldn't hold a magnet. It's royal
metal of some kind, I think. Base metals mostly melt at around fifteen
hundred, and that crucible is still dry as a bone at better than
seventeen."
"How are you going to separate out the tantalum and the others you want
from the ones that you don't want?"
"I'm afraid that I'm not going to, very well," replied Stevens, with a
wry grimace. "What I don't know about metallurgy would fill a library,
and I'm probably the world's worst chemist. However, by a series of
successive liquations, I hope to separate out fractions that I can
use. Platinum melts somewhere around seventeen-fifty, tantalum about
twenty-nine hundred, and tungsten not until 'way up around thirty-three,
or four hundred--and that, by the way, means lots of grief. Of course,
each fraction will probably be an alloy of one kind or another, but
I think maybe I'll be able to make them do."
"But mayn't that whole chunk be a pure metal?"
"It's conceivable, but not probable. There, she's beginning to separate
at just below eighteen hundred! Platinum group coming out now, I
think--platinum, rhodium, iridium, and that gang, you know. While I'm
doing this, you might be getting those five coils into exact resonance,
if you want to."
"Sure I want to," and Nadia made her way across to the short-wave
oscillator and set to work.
After an hour or so, bent over her delicate task, she began to twitch
uneasily, then shrugged her shoulders impatiently.
"What's the idea of staring at me so?" she broke out suddenly. "How do
you expect me to tune these things up if you...." She stopped abruptly,
mouth open in amazement, as she turned toward Stevens. He had not been
looking at her, but he turned a surprised face from his own task at the
sound of her voice. "Excuse me, please, Steve. I don't know what's the
matter with me--must be getting jumpy, I guess."
"I wish that was all, but it isn't!" Face suddenly grim and hard,
Stevens leaped to the communicator plate and shot the beam out into
space. "There's an answer, but that isn't it. You're a fine-tuned
instrument yourself, ace, and you've detected something.... I thought
so! There's the answer--the guy that was looking at you!"
Plainly there was revealed upon the plate a small, spherical space-ship,
very like the one that had attacked and destroyed the _Arcturus_. After
Nadia had taken one glance at it, Stevens shut off the power and leaped
out into the shop. He closed all the bulkhead doors and air-break
openings, then closed and secured the massive insulating door of the
lifeboat in which they had made their headquarters. Then, after they
had again put on the space-suits they had taken off such a short time
before, he extinguished all the lights and hooded the communicator
screen before he ventured again to glance out into the void.
"If I had a brain in my head, instead of the pint of bean soup I've got
up there, we'd have worn these when they cut up the _Arcturus_, and
saved us a lot of mental wear and tear," he remarked. "They were right
there in the lockers all the time, and I knew it!"
"Well, we got away, anyway. You couldn't be expected to think of
everything at once. We didn't have much time, you know."
"No, but I should have thought of anything as obvious as that, anyway.
Wonder how they found us? Did they detect us, or did they come out
to this comet after metal, same as we did, and find us accidentally?
However, it all works out the same--they're apparently out to get us.
I'm afraid this is going to be a whole lot like a rabbit fighting back
at a man with a gun; but we'll sure try to nibble us off a lunch while
they're getting a square meal ... here they come!"
The enemy sphere launched its flaming plane of force, and the _Forlorn
Hope_ shuddered in every plate and member as its apex was severed
cleanly under the impact. Instantly Stevens hurled his only weapons.
Flaming ultra-violet and dully glowing infra-red, the twin beams lashed
out; but their utmost force was of slight moment to the enormous power
driving the enemy screens. Two circular spots of cherry red in space
were the only results of Stevens' attack, and the next fierce cut
sheared away the two projectors and, incidentally, a full half of the
fifty-inch armor of the leading edge.
"Then we're checking out now?" Nadia asked quietly, as the man's hands
dropped from his useless controls. "I'm sorrier than I can say, lover.
But at least, I'm glad that I can go out with you," and her glorious
eyes were shining with unshed tears.
"Maybe, but snap out of it, girl--our hearts are still beating! We're
not dead yet, and maybe we won't be. Perhaps they want to capture us
alive, as they did before; if so, we may be able to hide out on them
somewhere and pull off another escape. Things don't look very bright, I
know, but we're not checking out until our numbers are actually run up!"
He hooked a hand under her belt as the shocks came closer, and stood
tense and ready. The lancing plane cut through one end of their control
room, and Stevens leaped with his companion toward the new-made opening;
while the air shrieked outward into space and their suits bulged
suddenly with the abrupt increase in pressure differential. While they
were in midflight, the frightful blade of destruction cleaved its way
through the control board and through the spot upon which they had been
standing a moment before. As they passed the severed edge, en route into
open spare, Stevens seized a metal brace and clung there, every nerve
taut.
"Something funny here, Nadia," he said after a little, in a low tone.
"They should have made one more cut, to make us absolutely blind and
helpless. As it is, they've clipped off all our projectors, so we can't
move, but I think we've got the whole control compartment of number two
lifeboat untouched. If so, we can look around, anyway. Let's go!"
Floating without effort from fragment to fragment, they made their way
toward the section of their cruiser as yet undamaged. They found an
airlock in working order, and were soon in the second lifeboat, where
Stevens hastily turned on a communicator and peered out into space.
"There they are! There's another stranger out there, too. They're
fighting with her, now--that's probably why they didn't polish us off."
Steel-braced, clumsy helmets touching, the two Terrestrials stared
spell-bound into the plate; watching while the insensately vicious
intelligences within the sphere brought its every force to bear upon
another and larger sphere which was now so close as to be plainly
visible. Like a gigantic drop of quicksilver this second globe
appeared--its smooth and highly-polished surface one enormous, perfect,
spherical mirror. Watching tensely, they saw flash out that frightful
plane of seething energy, with the effects of which they were all too
familiar, and saw it strike full upon the dazzling ball.
"This is awful, ace!" Stevens groaned. "They haven't got ray-screens,
either, and without them they don't stand a chance. No possible
substance can stand up under that beam. When they get done and turn back
to us, we'll have to dive back to where we were."
  *  *  *  *  *
But that brilliant mirror was not as vulnerable as Stevens had supposed.
The plane of force struck and clung, but could not penetrate it. Broken
up into myriads of scintillating crystals of light, intersecting,
multi-colored rays, and cascading flares of sparkling energy, the beam
was reflected, thrown back, hurled away on all sides into space in
coruscating, blinding torrents. And neither was the monster globe
inoffensive. The straining watchers saw a port open suddenly, emit a
flame-erupting something, and close as rapidly as it had opened. That
something was a projectile, its propelling rockets fiercely aflame; as
smoothly brilliant as its mother-ship and seemingly as impervious to the
lethal beams of the common foe. Detected almost instantly as it was, it
received the full power of the savage attack. The hitherto irresistible
plane of force beat upon it; ultra-violet, infra-red, and heat rays
enveloped it; there were hurled against it all the forces known to the
scientific minds within that fiendishly destructive sphere.
Finally, only a scant few hundreds of yards from its goal, the
protective mirror was punctured and the freight of high explosive let
go, with a silent, but nevertheless terrific, detonation. But now
another torpedo was on its way, and another, and another; boring on
ruthlessly toward the smaller sphere. Fighting simultaneously three
torpedos and the giant globe, the enemy began dodging, darting hither
and thither with a stupendous acceleration; but the tiny pursuers could
not be shaken off. At every dodge and turn, steering rockets burst into
furious activity and the projectiles rushed ever nearer. Knowing that
she had at last encountered a superior force, the sphere turned in
mad flight; but, prodigious as was her acceleration, the torpedoes
were faster and all three of them struck her at once. There ensued
an explosion veritably space-racking in its intensity; a flash of
incandescent brilliance that seemed to fill all space, subsiding into
a vast volume of tenuous gas which, feebly glowing, flowed about and
attached itself to Cantrell's Comet. And in the space where had been
the enemy sphere, there was nothing.
A slow-creeping pale blue rod of tangible force reached out from the
great sphere, touched the wreckage of the _Forlorn Hope_, and pulled;
gently, but with enormous power.
"Tractor beams again!" exclaimed Stevens, still at the plate.
"Everybody's got 'em but us, it seems."
"And we can't fight a bit any more, can we?"
"Not a chance--bows and arrows wouldn't do us much good. However, we may
not need 'em. Since they fought that other crew, and haven't blown us
up, they aren't active enemies of ours, and may be friendly. I haven't
any idea who or what they are, since even our communicator ray can't get
through that mirror, but it looks as though our best bet is to act
peaceable and see if we can't talk to them in some way. Right?"
"Right." They stepped out into the airlock, from which they saw that
the great sphere had halted only a few yards from them, and that an
indistinct figure stood in an open door, waving to them an unmistakable
invitation to enter the strange vessel.
"Shall we, Steve?"
"Might as well. They've got us foul, and can take us if they want us.
Anyway, we'll need at least a week to fix us up any kind of driving
power, so we can't run--and we probably couldn't get away from those
folks if we had all our power. They haven't blown us up, and they could
have done it easily enough. Besides, they act friendly, so we'd better
meet them half way. Dive!"
Floating toward the open doorway, they were met by another rod of force,
brought gently into the airlock, and supported upright beside the being
who had invited them to visit him. Apparently an empty space-suit stood
there; a peculiarly-fitted suit of some partially transparent, flexible,
glass-like material; towering fully a foot over the head of the tall
Terrestrial. Closer inspection, however, revealed that there was
something inside that suit--a shadowy, weirdly-transparent being,
staring at them with large, black eyes. The door clanged shut behind
them; they heard the faint hiss of inrushing air, and the inner door
opened; but their enveloping suits remained stretched almost as tightly
as ever. They felt the floor lurch beneath their feet, and a little
weight was granted them as the space-ship got under way. Stevens waved
his arms vigorously at the stranger, pointing backward toward where he
supposed their own craft to be. The latter waved an arm reassuringly,
pressed a contact, and a section of the wall suddenly became
transparent. Through it Stevens saw with satisfaction that the _Forlorn
Hope_ was not being abandoned; in the grip of powerful tractor beams,
every fragment of the wreckage was following close behind them in their
flight through space.
  *  *  *  *  *
Stevens and Nadia followed their guide along a corridor, through several
doors, and into a large room, which at first glance seemed empty, but
in which several of the peculiarly transparent people of the craft were
lying about upon cushions. They were undoubtedly human--but what humans!
Tall and reedy they were, with enormous barrel chests, topped by heads
which, though really large, appeared insignificant because of the
prodigious chests and because of the huge, sail-like, flapping ears.
Their skins were a strikingly, livid, pale blue, absolutely devoid of
hair; and their lidless eyes, without a sign of iris, were chillingly
horrible in their stark contrast of enormous, glaring black pupil and
ghastly, transparent blue eyeball.
As the two Terrestrials entered the room, the beings struggled to their
feet and hurried laboriously away. Soon one of them returned, dressed in
an insulating suit, and carrying three sets of head harnesses, connected
by multiplex cables to a large box which he placed upon the floor.
He handed the headsets to the first officer, who in turn placed two of
them at the feet of the Terrestrials, indicating to them that they were
to follow his example in placing them upon their heads, outside the
helmets. They did so, and even through the almost perfect insulation,
and in spite of the powerful heaters of their suits, they felt a touch
of frightful cold. The stranger turned a dial, and the two wanderers
from Earth were instantly in full mental communication with Barkovis,
the commander of a space-ship of Titan, the sixth satellite of Saturn!
"Well, I'll be ... say, what is this, anyway?" Steve exclaimed
involuntarily, and Nadia smiled as Barkovis answered with a thought,
clearer than any spoken words.
"It is a thought-exchanger. I do not know its fundamental mechanism,
since we did not invent it and since I have had little time to study
it. The apparatus, practically as you see it here, was discovered but a
short time ago, in a small, rocket-propelled space-ship which we found
some distance outside of the orbit of Jupiter. Its source of power had
been destroyed by the cold of outer space, but re-powering it was, of
course, a small matter. The crew of the vessel were all dead. They
were, however, of human stock, and of a type adapted for life upon
a satellite. I deduce, from your compact structure, your enormous
atmospheric pressure, and your, to us, unbelievably high body
temperature, that you must be planet-dwellers. I suppose that you
are natives of Jupiter?"
"Not quite." Stevens had in a measure recovered from his stunned
surprise. "We are from Tellus, the third planet," and he revealed
rapidly the events leading up to their present situation, concluding:
"The people in the other sphere were, we believe, natives of Jupiter or
of one of the satellites. We know nothing of them, since we could not
look through their screens. You rescued us from them; do you not know
them?"
"No. Our visirays also were stopped by their screens of force--screens
entirely foreign to our science. This is the first time that any
vessel from our Saturnian system has ever succeeded in reaching the
neighborhood of Jupiter. We came in peace, but they attacked us at sight
and we were obliged to destroy them. Now we must hurry back to Titan,
for two reasons. First, because we are already at the extreme limit
of our power range and Jupiter is getting further and further away
from Saturn. Second because our mirrors, which we had thought perfect
reflectors of all frequencies possible of generation, are not perfect.
Enough of those forces came through the mirrors to volatilize half our
crew, and in a few minutes more none of us would have been left alive.
Why, in some places our very atmosphere became almost hot enough to melt
water! If another of those vessels should attack us, in all probability
we should all be lost. Therefore we are leaving as rapidly as is
possible."
"You are taking the pieces of our ship along--we do not want to encumber
you."
"It is no encumbrance, since we have ample supplies of power. In fact,
we are now employing the highest acceleration we Titanians can endure
for any length of time."
Stevens pondered long, forgetting that his thoughts were plain as print
to the Titanian commander. Thank Heaven these strangers had sense enough
to be friendly--all intelligent races should be friends, for mutual
advancement. But it was a mighty long stretch to Saturn and this
acceleration wasn't so much. How long would it take to get there? Could
they get back? Wouldn't they save time by casting themselves adrift,
making the repairs most urgently needed, and going back to Ganymede
under their own power? But would they have enough power left in the
wreck to get even that far? And how about the big tube? He was
interrupted by an insistent thought from Barkovis.
"You will save time, Stevens, by coming with us to Titan. There we shall
aid you in repairing your vessel and in completing your transmitting
tube, in which we shall be deeply interested. Our power plants shall
supply you with energy for your return journey until you are close
enough to Jupiter to recover your own beam. You are tired. I would
suggest that you rest--that you sleep long and peacefully."
"You seem to be handling the _Forlorn Hope_ without any trouble--the
pieces aren't grinding at all. We'd better live there, hadn't we?"
"Yes that would be best, for all of us. You could not live a minute here
without your suits; and, efficiently insulated as those suits are, yet
your incandescent body temperature makes our rooms unbearably hot--so
hot that any of us must wear a space-suit while in the same room with
you, to avoid being burned to death."
"The incandescently hot" Terrestrials were wafted into the open airlock
of their lifeboat upon a wand of force, and soon had prepared a long
overdue supper, over which Stevens cast his infectious, boyish grin at
Nadia.
"Sweetheart, you are undoubtedly a 'warm number,' and you have often
remarked that I 'burn you up.' Nevertheless I think that we were both
considerably surprised to discover that we are both hot enough actually
to consume persons unfortunate enough to be confined in the same room
with us!"
"You're funny, Steve--like a crutch," she rebuked him, but smiled back,
an elusive dimple playing in one lovely brown cheek. "Looking right
through anybody is too ghastly for words, but I think they're perfectly
all x, anyway, in spite of their being so hideous and so cold-blooded!"
CHAPTER VI
A Frigid Civilization
"Hi, Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens!" Nadia strode purposely into
Stevens' room and seized him by the shoulder. "Are you going to sleep
all the way to Saturn? You answered me when I pounded on the partition
with a hammer, but I don't believe that you woke up at all. Get up,
you--breakfast will be all spoiled directly!"
"Huh?" Stevens opened one sluggish eye; then, as the full force of the
insult penetrated his consciousness, he came wide awake. "Lay off those
names, ace, or you'll find yourself walking back home!" he threatened.
"All x by me!" she retorted. "I might as well go home if you're going
to sleep _all_ the time!" and she widened her expressive eyes at him
impishly as she danced blithely back into the control room. As she went
out she slammed his door with a resounding clang, and Stevens pried
himself out of his bunk one joint at a time, dressed, and made himself
presentable.
"Gosh!" he yawned mightily as he joined the girl at breakfast. "I don't
know when I've had such a gorgeous sleep. How do you get by on so
little?"
"I don't. I sleep a lot, but I do it every night, instead of working for
four days and nights on end and then trying to make up all those four
nights' sleep at once. I'm going to break you of that, too, Steve, if
it's the last thing I ever do."
"There might be certain advantages in it, at that," he conceded, "but
sometimes you've got to do work when it's got to be done, instead of
just between sleeps. However, I'll try to do better. Certainly it is
a wonderful relief to get out of that mess, isn't it?"
"I'll say it is! But I wish that those folks were more like people.
They're nice, I think, really, but they're so ... so ... well, so
ghastly that it simply gives me the blue shivers just to look at one
of them!"
"They're pretty gruesome, no fooling," he agreed, "but you get used to
things like that. I just about threw a fit the first time I ever saw
a Martian, and the Venerians are even worse in some ways--they're so
clammy and dead-looking--but now I've got real friends on both planets.
One thing, though, gives me the pip. I read a story a while ago--the
latest best-seller thing of Thornton's named 'Interstellar Slush' or
some such tr...."
"Cleophora--An Interstellar Romance," she corrected him. "I thought it
was wonderful!"
"I didn't. It's fundamentally unsound. Look at our nearest neighbors,
who probably came from the same original stock we did. A Tellurian
can admire, respect, or like a Venerian, yes. But for _loving_ one of
them--wow! Beauty is purely relative, you know. For instance, I think
that you are the most perfectly beautiful thing I ever saw; but no
Venerian would think so. Far from it. Any Martian that hadn't seen many
of us would have to go rest his eyes after taking one good look at
you. Considering what love means, it doesn't stand to reason that any
Tellurian woman could possibly fall in love with any man not of her own
breed. Any writer is wrong who indulges in interplanetary love affairs
and mad passions. They simply don't exist. They _can't_ exist--they're
against all human instincts."
"Interplanetary--in this solar system--yes. But the Dacrovos were just
like us, only nicer."
"That's what gives me the pip. If our own cousins of the same solar
system are so repulsive to us, how would we be affected by entirely
alien forms of intelligence?"
"May be you're right, of course--but you may be wrong, too," she
insisted. "The Universe is big enough, so that people like the Dacrovos
may possibly exist in it somewhere. May be the Big Three will discover a
means of interstellar travel--then I'll get to see them myself, perhaps."
"Yes, and _if_ we do, and _if_ you ever see any such people, I'll bet
that the sight of them will make your hair curl right up into a ball,
too! But about Barkovis--remember how diplomatic the thoughts were that
he sent us? He described our structure as being 'compact,' but I got the
undertone of his real thoughts, as well. Didn't you?"
"Yes, now that you mention it, I did. He really thought that we were
white-hot, under-sized, overpowered, warty, hairy, hideously opaque and
generally repulsive little monstrosities--thoroughly unpleasant and
distasteful. But he was friendly, just the same. Heavens, Steve! Do you
suppose that he read our real thoughts, too?"
"Sure he did; but he is intelligent enough to make allowances, the same
as we are doing. He isn't any more insulted than we are. He knows that
such feelings are ingrained and cannot be changed."
  *  *  *  *  *
Breakfast over, they experienced a new sensation. For the first time in
months they had nothing to do! Used as they were to being surrounded by
pressing tasks, they enjoyed their holiday immensely for a few hours.
Sitting idly at the communicator plate, they scanned the sparkling
heavens with keen interest. Beneath them Jupiter was a brilliant
crescent not far from the sun in appearance, which latter had already
grown perceptibly smaller and less bright. Above them, and to their
right, Saturn shone refulgently, his spectacular rings plainly visible.
All about them were the glories of the firmament, which never fail to
awe the most seasoned observer. But idleness soon became irksome to
those two active spirits, and Stevens prowled restlessly about their
narrow quarters.
"I'm going to go to work before I go dippy," he soon declared. "They've
got lots of power, and we can rig up a transmitter unit to send it over
here to our receptor. Then I can start welding the old _Hope_ together
without waiting until we get to Titan to start it. Think I'll signal
Barkovis to come over, and see what he thinks about it."
The Titanian commander approved the idea, and the transmitting field was
quickly installed. Nadia insisted that she, too, needed to work, and
that she was altogether too good a mechanic to waste; therefore the two
again labored mightily together, day after day. But the girl limited
rigidly their hours of work to those of the working day; and evening
after evening Barkovis visited with them for hours. Dressed in his heavy
space-suit and supported by a tractor beam well out of range of what
seemed to him terrific heat radiated by the bodies of the Terrestrials,
he floated along unconcernedly; while over the multiplex cable of the
thought-exchanger he conversed with the man and woman seated just inside
the open outer door of their air-lock. The Titanian's appetite for
information was insatiable--particularly did he relish everything
pertaining to the earth and to the other inner planets, forever barred
to him and to his kind. In return Stevens and Nadia came gradually to
know the story of the humanity of Titan.
"I am glad beyond measure to have known you," Barkovis mused, one night.
"Your existence proves that there is truth in mythology, as some of
us have always believed. Your visit to Titan will create a furor in
scientific circles, for you are impossibility incarnate--personifications
of the preposterous. In you, wildest fancy had become commonplace.
According to many of our scientists, it is utterly impossible for you
to exist. Yet you say, and it must be, that there are millions upon
millions of similar beings. Think of it! Venerians, Tellurians,
Martians, the satellite dwellers of the lost space-ship, and us--so
similar mentally, yet physically how different!"
"But where does the mythology come in?" thought Nadia.
"We have unthinkably ancient legends which say that once Titan was
extremely hot, and that our remote ancestors were beings of fire, in
whose veins ran molten water instead of blood. Since our recorded
history goes back some tens of thousands of Saturnian years, and since
in that long period there has been no measurable change in us, few
of us have believed in the legends at all. They have been thought the
surviving figments of a barbarous, prehistoric worship of the sun.
However, such a condition is not in conflict with the known facts of
cosmogony, and since there actually exists such a humanity as yours--a
humanity whose bodily tissues actually _are_ composed largely of molten
water--those ancient legends must indeed have been based upon truth.
"What an evolution! Century after century of slowly decreasing
temperature--one continuous struggle to adapt the physique to a
constantly changing environment. First they must have tried to maintain
their high temperature by covering and heating their cities.--Then,
as vegetation died, they must have bred into their plants the ability
to use as sap purely chemical liquids, such as our present natural
fluids--which also may have been partly synthetic then--instead of the
molten water to which they had been accustomed. They must have modified
similarly the outer atmosphere; must have made it more reactive, to
compensate for the lowered temperature at which metabolism must take
place. As Titan grew colder and colder they probably dug their cities
deeper and ever deeper; until humanity came finally to realize that it
must itself change completely or perish utterly.
"Then we may picture them as aiding evolution in changing their body
chemistry. For thousands, and thousands of years there must have gone
on the gradual adaptation of blood stream and tissue to more and more
volatile liquids, and to lower and still lower temperatures. This must
have continued until Titan arrived at the condition which has now
obtained for ages--a condition of thermal equilibrium with space upon
one hand and upon the other the sun, which changes appreciably only in
millions upon millions of years. In equilibrium at last--with our bodily
and atmospheric temperatures finally constant at their present values,
which seem as low to you as yours appear high to us. Truly, an evolution
astounding to contemplate!"
"But how about power?" asked Stevens. "You seem to have all you want,
and yet it doesn't stand to reason that there could be very much
generated upon a satellite so old and so cold."
"You are right. For ages there has been but little power produced
upon Titan. Many cycles ago, however, our scientists had developed
rocket-driven space-ships, with which they explored our neighboring
satellites, and even Saturn itself. It is from power plants upon Saturn
that we draw energy. Their construction was difficult in the extreme,
since the pioneers had to work in braces because of the enormous force
of gravity. Then, too, they had to be protected from the overwhelming
pressure and poisonous qualities of the air, and insulated from a
temperature far above the melting point of water. In such awful heat,
of course, our customary building material, water, could not be
employed...."
"But all our instruments have indicated that Saturn is _cold_!" Stevens
interrupted.
"Its surface temperature, as read from afar, would be low," conceded
Barkovis, "but the actual surface of the planet is extremely hot, and
is highly volcanic. Practically none of its heat is radiated because of
the great density and depth of its atmosphere, which extends for many
hundreds of your kilometers. It required many thousands of lives and
many years of time to build and install those automatic power plants,
but once they were in operation, we were assured of power for many tens
of thousands of years to come."
"Our system of power transmission is more or less like yours, but we
haven't anything like your range. Suppose you'd be willing to teach me
the computation of your fields?"
"Yes, we shall be glad to give you the formulae. Being an older race, it
is perhaps natural that we should have developed certain refinements as
yet unknown to you. But I am, I perceived, detaining you from your time
of rest--goodbye," and Barkovis was wafted back toward his mirrored
globe.
"What do you make of this chemical solution blood of theirs, Steve?"
asked Nadia, watching the placidly floating form of the Titanian
captain.
"Not much. I may have mentioned before that there are one or two, or
perhaps even three men who are better chemists than I am. I gathered
that it is something like a polyhydric alcohol and something like a
substituted hydrocarbon, and yet different from either in that it
contains flourin in loose combination. I think it is something that our
Tellurian chemists haven't got yet; but they've got so many organic
compounds now that they may have synthesized it, at that. You see,
Titan's atmosphere isn't nearly as dense as ours, but what there is
of it is pure dynamite. Ours is a little oxygen, mixed with a lot of
inert ingredients. Theirs is oxygen, heavily laced with flourin. It's
_reactive_, no fooling! However, something pretty violent must be
necessary to carry on body reactions at such a temperature as theirs."
"Probably; but I know even less about that kind of thing than you do.
Funny, isn't it, the way he thinks 'water' when he means ice, and always
thinks of our real water as being molten?"
"Reasonable enough when you think about it. Temperature differences are
logarithmic, you know, not arithmetic--the effective difference between
his body temperature and ours is perhaps even greater than that between
ours and that of melted iron. We never think of iron as being a liquid,
you know."
"That's right, too. Well, good night, Steve dear."
"'Bye, little queen of space--see you at breakfast," and the _Forlorn
Hope_ became dark and silent.
  *  *  *  *  *
Day after day the brilliant sphere flew toward distant Saturn, with the
wreckage of the _Forlorn Hope_ in tow. Piece by piece that wreckage was
brought together and held in place by the Titanian tractors; and slowly
but steadily, under Stevens' terrific welding projector, the stubborn
steel flowed together, once more to become a seamless, spaceworthy
structure. And Nadia, the electrician, followed close behind the welder.
Wielding torch, pliers and spanner with practised hand, she repaired or
cut out of circuit the damaged accumulator cells and reunited the ends
of each severed power lead. Understanding Nadia's work thoroughly, the
Titanians were not particularly interested in it; but whenever Stevens
made his way along an outside seam, he had a large and thrillingly
horrified gallery. Everyone who could possibly secure permission to
leave the sphere did so, each upon his own pencil of force, and went
over to watch the welder. They did not come close to him--to venture
within fifty feet of that slow moving spot of scintillating brilliance,
even in a space-suit, meant death--but, poised around him in space, they
watched with shuddering, incredulous amazement, the monstrous human
being in whose veins ran molten water instead of blood; whose body was
already so fiercely hot that it could exist unharmed while working
practically without protection, upon _liquefied_ metal!
Finally the welding was done. The insulating space was evacuated and
held its vacuum--outer and inner shells were bottle-tight. The two
mechanics heaved deep sighs of relief as they discarded their cumbersome
armor and began to repair what few of their machine tools had been
damaged by the slashing plane of force which had so neatly sliced the
_Forlorn Hope_ into sections.
"Say, big fellow, you're the guy that slings the ink, ain't you?" Nadia
extinguished her torch and swaggered up to Stevens, hands on hips, her
walk an exaggerated roll. "Write me out a long walk. This job's all
played out, so I think I'll get me a good job on Titan. I said give me
my time, you big stiff!"
"You didn't say nothing!" growled Stevens in his deepest bass, playing
up to her lead as he always did. "Bounce back, cub, you've struck a
rubber fence! You signed on for duration and you'll stick--see?"
Arm in arm they went over to the nearest communicator plate. Flipping
the switch, Stevens turned the dial and Titan shone upon the screen; so
close, that it no longer resembled a moon, but was a world toward which
they were falling with an immense velocity.
"Not close enough to make out much detail yet--let's take another
look at Saturn," and Stevens projected the visiray beam out toward the
mighty planet. It was now an enormous full moon, almost five degrees in
apparent diameter,[1] its visible surface an expanse of what they knew
to be billowing cloud, shining brilliantly white in the pale sunlight,
broken only by a dark equatorial band.
[Footnote 1: The moon subtends an angle of about one-half of a degree.]
"Those rings were _such_ a gorgeous spectacle a little while ago!" Nadia
mourned. "It's a shame that Titan has to be right in their plane, isn't
it? Think of living this close to one of the most wonderful sights in
the Solar System, and never being able to see it. Think they know what
they're missing, Steve?"
"We'll have to ask Barkovis," Stevens replied. He swung the communicator
beam back toward Titan, and Nadia shuddered.
"Oh, it's hideous!" she exclaimed. "I thought that it would improve as
we got closer, but the plainer we can see it, the worse it gets. Just to
think of human beings, even such cold-blooded ones as those over there,
living upon such a horrible moon and _liking_ it, gives me the blue
shivers!"
"It's pretty bleak, no fooling," he admitted, and peered through the
eyepiece of the visiray telescope, studying minutely the forbidding
surface of the satellite they were so rapidly approaching.
Larger and larger it loomed, a cratered, jagged globe of desolation
indescribable; of sheer, bitter cold incarnate and palpable; of stark,
sharp contrasts. Gigantic craters, in whose yawning depths no spark of
warmth had been generated for countless cycles of time, were surrounded
by vast plains eroded to the dead level of a windless sea. Every lofty
object cast a sharply outlined shade of impenetrable blackness, beside
which the weak light of the sun became a dazzling glare. The ground was
either a brilliant white or an intense black, unrelieved by half-tones.
"I can't hand it much, either, Nadia, but it's all in the way you've
been brought up, you know. This is home to them, and just to look at
Tellus would give them the pip. Ha! Here's something you'll like, even
if it does look so cold that it makes me feel like hugging a couple of
heater coils. It's Barkovis' city the one we're heading for, I think.
It's close enough now so that we can get it on the plate," and he set
the communicator beam upon the metropolis of Titan.
"Why, I don't see a thing, Steve--where and what is it?" They were
dropping vertically downward toward the center of a vast plain of white,
featureless and desolate; and Nadia stared in disappointment.
"You'll see directly--it's too good to spoil by telling you what to look
for or wh...."
"Oh, there it is!" she cried. "It _is_ beautiful, Steve, but how
frightfully, utterly cold!"
  *  *  *  *  *
A flash of prismatic color had caught the girl's eye, and, one
transparent structure thus revealed to her sight, there had burst into
view a city of crystal. Low buildings of hexagonal shape, arranged
in irregularly variant hexagonal patterns, extended mile upon mile.
From the roofs of the structures lacy spires soared heavenward;
inter-connected by long, slim cantilever bridges whose prodigious
spans seemed out of all proportion to the gossamer delicacy of their
construction. Buildings, spires, and bridges formed fantastic
geometrical designs, at which Nadia exclaimed in delight.
"I've just thought of what that reminds me of--it's snowflakes!"
"Sure--I knew it was something familiar. Snowflakes--no two are ever
exactly alike, and yet every one is symmetrical and hexagonal. We're
going to land on the public square--see the crowds? Let's put on our
suits and go out."
The _Forlorn Hope_ lay in a hexagonal park, and near it the Titanian
globe had also come to rest. All about the little plot towered the
glittering buildings of crystal, and in its center played a fountain;
a series of clear and sparkling cascades of liquid jewels. Under foot
there spread a thick, soft carpet of whitely brilliant vegetation.
Throngs of the grotesque citizens of Titania were massed to greet the
space-ships; throngs clustering close about the globular vessel, but
maintaining a respectful distance from the fiercely radiant Terrestrial
wedge. All were shouting greetings and congratulations--shouts which
Stevens found as intelligible as his own native tongue.
"Why, I can understand every word they say, Steve!" Nadia exclaimed, in
surprise. "How come, do you suppose?"
"I can, too. Don't know--must be from using that thought telephone of
theirs so much, I guess. Here comes Barkovis--I'll ask him."
The Titanian commander had been in earnest conversation with a group of
fellow-creatures and was now walking toward the Terrestrials, carrying
the multiple headsets. Placing them upon the white sward, he backed
away, motioning the two visitors to pick them up.
"It may not be necessary, Barkovis," Stevens said, slowly and clearly.
"We do not know why, but we can understand what your people are saying,
and it may be that you can now understand us."
"Oh, yes, I can understand your English perfectly. A surprising
development, but perhaps, after all, one that should have been expected,
from the very nature of the device we have been using. I wanted to tell
you that I have just received grave news, which makes it impossible for
us to help you immediately, as I promised. While we were gone, one of
our two power-plants upon Saturn failed. In consequence, Titan's power
has been cut to a minimum, since maintaining our beam at that great
distance required a large fraction of the output of the other plant.
Because of this lack, the Sedlor walls were weakened to such a point
that in spite of the Guardian's assurances, I think trouble is
inevitable. At all events, it is of the utmost importance that we begin
repairing the damaged unit, for that is to be a task indeed."
"Yes, it will take time," agreed Stevens, remembering what the
Titanian captain had told him concerning the construction of those
plants--generators which had been in continuous and automatic operation
for thousands of Saturnian years.
"It will take more than time--it will take lives," replied Barkovis,
gravely. "Scores, perhaps hundreds, of us will never again breathe the
clear, pure air of Titan. In spite of all precaution and all possible
bracing and insulation, man after man after man will be crushed by
his own weight, volatilized by the awful heat, poisoned by the foul
atmosphere, or will burst into unthinkable flames at the touch of some
flying spark from the inconceivably hot metals with which we shall have
to work. A horrible fate, but we shall not lack for volunteers."
"Sure not; and of course you yourself would go. And I never thought of
the effect a spark would have on you--your tissues would probably be
wildly inflammable. But say, I just had a thought. Just how hot is the
air at those plants and just what is the actual pressure?"
"According to the records, the temperature is some forty of your
centigrade degrees above the melting-point of water, and the pressure
is not far short of two of your meters of mercury. I find it almost
impossible to think of mercury as a liquid, however."
"You find it impossible, since you use it as a metal, for wires in coils
and so on. But plus forty, while pretty warm, isn't impossible, by any
means; and we could stand double our air pressure for quite a while.
Both my partner and I are pretty fair mechanics and we've got quite a
line of machine tools, such as you could not possibly have here. We'll
give it a whirl, since we owe you something already. Lead us to it,
ace--but wait a minute! We can't see through the fog, so couldn't find
the plants, and probably your wiring diagrams would explode if I touched
them."
"I never thought of your helping us," mused Barkovis. "The idea of any
living being existing in that inferno has always been unthinkable, but
the difficulties you mention are slight. We have already built in our
vessel communicators similar to yours, and radio sets. With these we can
guide you and explain the plants to you as you work, and our tractor
beams will be of assistance to you in moving heavy objects, even at such
distances from the surface as we Titanians shall have to maintain. If
you will set out a flask of your atmosphere, we will analyze it, for the
thought has come to me that perhaps, being planet-dwellers yourselves,
the air of Saturn might not be as poisonous to you as it is to us."
"That's a thought, too," and, the news broadcast, it was not long until
the two ships leaped into the air, to the accompaniment of the cheers
and plaudits of a watching multitude.
  *  *  *  *  *
In a wide curve they sped toward Saturn. Passing so close to the
enormous rings that the individual meteoric fragments could almost be
seen with the unaided eye, they flashed on and on, slowing down long
before they approached the upper surface of the envelope of cloud.
The spherical space-ship stopped and Stevens, staring into his useless
screen, drove the _Forlorn Hope_ downward mile after mile, solely under
Barkovis' direction, changing course and power from time to time as the
Titanian's voice came from the speaker at his elbow. Slower and slower
became the descent, until finally, almost upon the broad, flat roof
of the power-plant, Stevens saw it in his plate. Breathing deeply in
relief, he dropped quickly down upon a flat pavement, neutralized his
controls, and turned to Nadia.
"Well, old golf-shootist, we're here at last--now we'll go out and see
what's gone screwy with the works. Remember that gravity is about double
normal here, and conduct yourself accordingly."
"But it's supposed to be only about nine-tenths," she objected.
"That's at the outer surface of the atmosphere," he replied. "And it's
_some_ atmosphere--not like the thin layer we've got on Tellus."
They went into the airlock, and Stevens admitted air until their
suits began to collapse. Then, face-plate valves cracked, he sniffed
cautiously, finally opening his helmet wide. Nadia followed suit and
the man laughed as she wrinkled her nose in disgust as two faint, but
unmistakable odors smote her olfactory nerves.
"I never cared particularly for hydrogen sulphide and sulphur dioxide,
either," he assured her, "but they aren't strong enough to hurt us in
the short time we'll be here. Those Titanian chemists know their stuff,
though."
He opened the outer valves slowly, then opened the door and they stepped
down upon the smooth, solid floor, which Stevens examined carefully.
"I thought so, from his story. Solid platinum! This whole plant is
built of platinum, iridium, and noble alloys--the only substances known
that will literally last forever. Believe me, ace of my bosom, I don't
wonder that it cost them lives to build it--with their conditions, I
don't see how they ever got it built at all."
Before them rose an immense, flat-topped cone of metal, upon the top of
which was situated the power plant. Twelve massive pillars supported a
flat roof, but permitted the air to circulate freely throughout the one
great room which housed the machinery. They climbed a flight of stairs,
passed between two pillars, and stared about them. There was no noise,
no motion--there was nothing that _could_ move. Twelve enormous masses
of metallic checkerwork, covered with wide cooling fins, almost filled
the vast hall. From the center of each mass great leads extended out
into a clear space in the middle of the room, there uniting in mid-air
to form one enormous bus-bar. This bar, thicker than a man's body, had
originally curved upward to the base of an immense parabolic structure
of latticed bars. Now, however, it was broken in midspan and the two
ends bent toward the floor. Above their heads, a jagged hole gaped in
the heavy metal of the roof, and a similar hole had been torn in the
floor. The bar had been broken and these holes had been made by some
heavy body, probably a meteorite, falling with terrific velocity.
"This is it, all right," Stevens spoke to distant Barkovis. "Sure
there's nothing on this beam? If it should be hot and I should short
circuit or bridge it with my body, it would be just too bad."
"We have made sure that nothing is connected to it," the Titanian
assured him. "Do you think you can do anything?"
"Absolutely. We've got jacks that'll bend heavier stuff than that, and
after we get it straightened the welding will be easy, but I'll have
to have some metal. Shall I cut a piece off the pavement outside?"
"That will not be necessary. You will find ample stores of spare metal
piled at the base of each pillar."
"All x. Now we'll get the jack, Nadia," and they went back to their
vessel, finding that upon Saturn, their combined strength was barely
sufficient to drag the heavy tool along the floor.
"Stand aside, please. We will place it for you," a calm voice sounded in
their ears, and a pale blue tractor beam picked the massive jack lightly
from the floor, and as lightly lifted it to its place beneath the broken
bus-bar and held it there while Stevens piled blocks and plates of
platinum beneath its base.
"Well, here's where I peel down as far as the law allows. This is going
to be real work, girl--no fooling. It'd help a lot if this outfit were
sending out a few thousand kilo-franks instead of standing idle."
"How would that help?"
"It's a heat-engine, you know--works by absorbing heat. The cold air
sinks--I imagine it pretty nearly blows a gale down the side of this
cone when it's working--and hot air rushes in to take its place. I could
use a little cool breeze right now," and Stevens, stripped to the waist,
bent to the lever of the powerful hydraulic jack.
Beads of sweat gathered upon his broad back, uniting to form tiny
rivulets, and the girl became highly concerned about him.
"Let me help you, Steve--I'm pretty husky, too, you know."
"Sure you are, ace, but this is a job for a truck-horse, not a
tenderly-nurtured maiden of the upper classes. You can help, though, by
breaking out that welding outfit and getting it ready while I'm doing
this bending to prepare for the welding."
Under the urge of that mighty jack the ends of the broken bus-bar rose
into place, while far off in space the Titanians clustered about their
visiray screens, watching, in almost unbelieving amazement, the
supernatural being who labored in that reeking inferno of heat and
poisonous vapor--who labored almost naked and entirely unprotected,
refreshing himself from time to time with drafts of molten water!
"All x, Barkovis--that's high, I guess." Stevens flipped perspiration
from his hot forehead with a wet finger and straightened his weary back.
"Now you can put this jack away where we had it. Then you might trundle
me over enough of that spare metal to fill up this hole, and I'll put on
my suit and goggles and practice welding on this floor and the roof, to
get the feel of the metal before I tackle the bar."
The hole in the floor was filled with scrap and soon sparks were flying
wildly as the searing beam of Stevens' welding projector bit viciously
into the stubborn alloy of noble metals; fashioning a smooth, solid
floor where the yawning aperture had been. Then, lifted with his tools
and plates to the roof, the man repaired that hole also.
"Now I know enough about it to do a good job on the bar," he decided,
and brick after brick of alloy was fused into the crack, until only a
smoothly rounded bulge betrayed that a break had ever existed in that
mighty rod of metal.
"Give 'em the signal to draw power, and see if that's all that was the
matter," Stevens instructed, as he relaxed in the grateful coolness of
their control room. "Whew, that was a warm job, Nadia--and this air of
ours does smell good!"
  *  *  *  *  *
"It was a horrible job, and I'm glad it's done," she declared. "But say,
Steve, that thing looks as little like a power-plant as anything I can
imagine. How does it work? You said that it worked on heat, but I don't
quite see how. But don't draw diagrams and _please_ don't integrate!"
"No ordinary plant such as we use could run for centuries
without attention," he replied. "This is a highly advanced
heat-engine--something like a thermo-couple, you know. This whole thing
is simply the hot end, connected to the cold end on Titan by a beam
instead of wires. When it's working, this metal must cool off something
fierce. That's what the checkerwork and fins are for--so that it can
absorb the maximum amount of heat from the current of hot, moist air
I spoke about. It's a sweet system--we'll have to rig up one between
Tellus and the moon. Or even between the Equator and the Arctic Circle
there'd be enough thermal differential to give us a million kilofranks.
We haven't got the all x signal yet, but it's working--look at it sweat
as it cools down!"
"I'll say it's sweating--the water is simply streaming off it!" In their
plate they saw that moisture was already beginning to condense upon the
heat-absorber: moisture running down the fins in streams and creeping
over the dull metal floor in sluggish sheets; moisture which, turning
into ice in the colder interior of the checkerwork, again became fluid
at the inrush of hot, wet Saturnian air.
"There's the signal--all x, Barkovis? By the way it's condensing water,
it seems to be functioning again."
"Perfect!" came the Titanian's enthusiastic reply, "You two
planet-dwellers have done more in three short hours than the entire
force of Titan could have accomplished in months. You have earned, and
shall receive, the highest...."
"As you were, ace!" Stevens interrupted, embarrassed. "This job was just
like shooting fish down a well, for us. Since you saved our lives, we
owe you a lot yet. We're coming out--straight up!"
The _Forlorn Hope_ shot upward, through mile after mile of steaming fog,
until at last she broke through into the light, clear outer atmosphere.
Stevens located the Titanian space-ship, and the two vessels once more
hurtling together through the ether toward Titan, he turned to his
companion.
"Take the controls, will you, Nadia? Think I'll finish up the tube. I
brought along a piece of platinum from the power plant, and something
that I think is tantalum from Barkovis' description of it. With those
and the fractions we melted out, I think I can make everything we'll
need."
Now that he had comparatively pure metal with which to work, drawing
the leads and filaments was relatively a simple task. Working over
the hot-bench with torch and welding projector, he made short work of
running the leads through the almost plastic glass of the great tube and
of sealing them in place. The plates and grids presented more serious
problems; but they were solved and, long before Titan was reached, the
tube was out in space, supported by a Titanian tractor beam between the
two vessels. Stevens came into the shop, holding a modified McLeod gauge
which he had just taken from the interior of the tube. When it had come
to equilibrium, he read it carefully and yelled.
"Eureka, little fellow! She's down to where I can't read it, even on
this big gauge--so hard that it won't need flashing--harder than any
vacuum I ever got on Tellus, even with a Rodebush-Michalek super-pump!"
"But how about occluded and absorbed gas in the filaments and so on when
they heat up?" demanded Nadia, practically.
"All gone, ace. I out-gassed 'em plenty out there--seven times, almost
to fusion. There isn't enough gas left in the whole thing to make a deep
breath for a microbe."
He took up his welding projector and a beam carried him back to the
tube. There, in the practically absolute vacuum of space, the last
openings in the glass were sealed, and man and great transmitting tube
were wafted lightly back into the Terrestrial cruiser.
Hour after hour mirrored Titanian sphere and crude-fashioned terrestrial
wedge bored serenely on through space, and it was not until Titan loomed
large beneath them that the calm was broken by an insistent call from
Titan to the sphere.
"Barkodar, attention! Barkodar, attention!" screamed from the speakers,
and they heard Barkovis acknowledge the call.
"The Sedlor have broken through and are marching upon Titania. The order
has gone out for immediate mobilization of every unit."
"There's that word 'Sedlor' again--what are they, anyway, Steve?"
demanded Nadia.
"I don't know. I was going to ask him when he sprung it on us first, but
he was pretty busy then and I haven't thought of it since. Something
pretty serious, though--they've jumped their acceleration almost to
Tellurian gravity, and none of them can live through much of that."
"Tellurians?" came the voice of Barkovis from the speaker. "We have
just...."
"All x--we were on your wave and heard it," interrupted Stevens. "We're
with you. What are those Sedlor, anyway? Maybe we can help you dope out
something."
"Perhaps--but whatever you do, do not use your heat-projector. That
would start a conflagration raging over the whole country, and we shall
have enough to do without fighting fire. But it may be that you have
other weapons, of which we are ignorant, and I can use a little time in
explanation before we arrive. The Sedlor are a form of life, something
like your..." he paused, searching through his scanty store of Earthly
knowledge, then went on, doubtfully, "perhaps some thing like your
insects. They developed a sort of intelligence, and because of their
fecundity, adapted themselves to their environment as readily as did
man; and for ages they threatened man's supremacy upon Titan. They
devoured vegetation, crops, animals, and mankind. After a world-wide
campaign, however, they were finally exterminated, save in the
neighborhood of one great volcanic crater, which they so honeycombed
that it is almost impregnable. All around that district we have erected
barriers of force, maintained by a corps of men known as 'Guardians of
the Sedlor.' These barriers extend so far into the ground and so high
into the air that the Sedlor can neither burrow beneath them nor fly
over them. They were being advanced as rapidly as possible, and in a
few more years the insects would have been destroyed completely--but
now they are again at large. They have probably developed an armor or
a natural resistance greater than the Guardians thought possible, so
that when the walls were weakened, they came through in their millions,
underground and undetected. They are now attacking our nearest city--the
one you know, and which you have called Titania."
"What do you use--those high-explosive bombs?"
"The bombs were developed principally for use against them, but proved
worse than useless, for we found that when a Sedlor was blown to pieces,
each piece forthwith developed into a new, complete creature. Our most
efficient weapons are our heat rays--not yours remember--and poison gas.
I must prepare our arms."
"Would our heat-ray actually set them afire, Steve?" Nadia asked, as the
plate went blank.
"I'll say it would. I'll show you what heat means to them--showing
you will be plainer than any amount of explanation," and he shot the
visiray beam down toward the city of Titania. Into a low-lying building
it went, and Nadia saw a Titanian foundry in full operation. Men clad
in asbestos armor were charging, tending, and tapping great electric
furnaces and crucibles; shrinking back and turning their armored heads
away as the hissing, smoking melt crackled into the molds from their
long-handled ladles. Nadia studied the foundry for a moment, interested,
but unimpressed.
"Of course it's hot there--foundries always _are_ hot," she argued.
"Yes, but you haven't got the idea yet." Stevens turned again to the
controls, following the sphere toward what was evidently a line of
battle. "That stuff that they are melting and casting and that is so
hot, is not metal, but _ice!_ Remember that the vital fluid of all life
here, animal and vegetable, corresponding to our water, is probably
more inflammable than gasoline. If they can't work on ice-water without
wearing suits of five-ply asbestos, what would a real heat-ray do to
them? It'd be about like our taking a dive into the sun!"
"_Ice_!" she exclaimed. "Oh of course--but you couldn't really believe
a thing like that without seeing it, could you? Oh, Steve--how utterly
horrible!"
  *  *  *  *  *
The "Barkodar" had dropped down into a line of sister ships, and had
gone into action in midair against a veritable swarm of foes. Winged
centipedes they were--centipedes fully six feet long, hurling themselves
along the ground and through the air in furious hordes. From the flying
globes emanated pale beams of force, at the touch of which the Sedlor
disappeared in puffs of vapor. Upon the ground huge tractors and trucks,
manned by masked soldiery, mounted mighty reflectors projecting the same
lethal beam. From globes and tanks there sounded a drumming roar and
small capsules broke in thousands among the foe; emitting a red cloud of
gas in which the centipedes shriveled and died. But for each one that
was destroyed two came up from holes in the ground and the battle-line
fell back toward Titania, back toward a long line of derrick-like
structures which were sinking force-rods into the ground in furious
haste.
Stevens flashed on his ultra-violet projector and swung it into the
thickest ranks of the enemy. In the beam many of the monsters died,
but the Terrestrial ray was impotent compared with the weapons of the
Titanians, and Stevens, snapping off the beam with a bitter imprecation,
shot the visiray out toward the bare, black cone of the extinct volcano
and studied it with care.
"Barkovis, I've got a thought!" he snapped into the microphone. "Their
stronghold is in that mountain, and there's millions of them in there
yet, coming out along their tunnels. They've got all the vegetation
eaten away for miles, so there's nothing much left there to spread a
fire if I go to work on that hill, and, I'll probably melt enough water
to put out most of the fires I start. Detail me a couple of ships to
drop your fire-foam bombs on any little blazes that may spread, and I'll
give them so much to worry about at home, that they'll forget all about
Titania."
The _Forlorn Hope_ darted toward the crater, followed closely by two of
the dazzling globes. They circled the mountain until Stevens found a
favorable point of attack--a stupendous vertical cliff of mingled rock
and crystal, upon the base of which he trained his terrific infra-red
projector.
"I'm going to draw a lot of power," he warned the Titanians then. "I'm
giving this gun everything she'll take."
He drove the massive switches in, and as that dull red beam struck the
cliff's base there was made evident the awful effect of a concentrated
beam of real and pure heat upon such an utterly frigid world. Vast
columns of fire roared aloft, helping Stevens, melting and destroying
the very ground as the bodies of the Sedlor in that gigantic ant-heap
burst into flames. Clouds of superheated steam roared upward, condensing
into a hot rain which descended in destructive torrents upon the
fastnesses of the centipedes. As the raging beam ate deeper and deeper
into the base of the cliff, the mountain itself began to disintegrate;
block after gigantic block breaking off and crashing down into the
flaming, boiling, seething cauldron which was the apex of that ravening
beam.
Hour after hour Stevens drove his intolerable weapon into the great
mountain, teeming with Sedlorean life; and hour after hour a group of
Titanian spheres stood by, deluging the surrounding plain with a flood
of heavy fumes, through which the holocaust could not spread for lack of
oxygen. Not until the mountain was gone--not until in its stead there
lay a furiously boiling lake, its flaming surface hundreds of feet below
the level of the plain--did Stevens open his power circuits and point
the deformed prow of the _Forlorn Hope_ toward Titania.
CHAPTER VII
The Return to Ganymede
"Must you go back to Ganymede?" Barkovis asked, slowly and
thoughtfully. He was sitting upon a crystal bench beside the fountain,
talking with Stevens, who, dressed in his bulging space-suit, stood near
an airlock of the _Forlorn Hope_. "It seems a shame that you should face
again those unknown, monstrous creatures who so inexcusably attacked us
both without provocation."
"I'm not so keen on it myself, but I can't see any other way out of it,"
the Terrestrial replied. "We left a lot of our equipment there, you
know; and even if I should build duplicates here, it wouldn't do us any
good. These ten-nineteens are the most powerful transmitting tubes known
when we left Tellus, but even their fields, dense as they are, can't
hold an ultra-beam together much farther than about six astronomical
units. So you see we can't possibly reach our friends from here with
this tube; and your system of beam transmission won't hold anything
together even that far, and won't work on any wave shorter than Roeser's
Rays. We may run into some more of those little spheres, though, and I
don't like the prospect. I wonder if we couldn't plate a layer of that
mirror of yours upon the _Hope_ and carry along a few of those bombs? By
the way, what is that explosive--or is it something beyond Tellurian
chemistry?"
"Its structure should be clear to you, although you probably could not
prepare it upon Tellus because of your high temperature. It is nothing
but nitrogen--twenty-six atoms of nitrogen combined to form one molecule
of what you would call--N-twenty-six?"
"Wow!" Stevens whistled. "Crystalline, pentavalent nitrogen--no wonder
it's violent!"
"We could, of course, cover your vessel with the mirror, but I am afraid
that it would prove of little value. The plates are so hot that it would
soon volatilize."
"Not necessarily," argued Stevens. "We could live in number one
life-boat, and shut off the heat everywhere else. The life-boats are
insulated from the structure proper, and the inner and outer walls of
the structure are insulated from each other. With only the headquarters
lifeboat warm, the outer wall could be held pretty close to zero
absolute."
"That is true. The bombs, of course, are controlled by radio, and
therefore may be attached to the outer wall of your vessel. We shall be
glad to do these small things for you."
The heaters of the _Forlorn Hope_ were shut off, and as soon as the
outer shell had cooled to Titanian temperature, a corps of mechanics set
to work. A machine very like a concrete mixer was rolled up beside the
steel vessel, and into its capacious maw were dumped boxes and barrels
of dry ingredients and many cans of sparkling liquid. The resultant
paste was pumped upon the steel plating in a sluggish, viscid stream,
which spread out into a thick and uniform coating beneath the flying
rollers of the skilled Titanian workmen. As it hardened, the paste
smoothed magically into the perfect mirror which covered the
space-vessels of the satellite; and a full dozen of the mirror explosive
bombs of this strange people were hung in the racks already provided.
"Once again I must caution you concerning those torpedoes," Barkovis
warned Stevens. "If you use them all, very well, but do not try to take
even one of them into any region where it is very hot, for it will
explode and demolish your vessel. If you do not use them, destroy them
before you descend into the hot atmosphere of Ganymede. The mirror will
volatilize harmlessly at the temperature of melting mercury, but the
torpedoes must be destroyed. Once more, Tellurians, we thank you for
what you have done, and wish you well."
"Thanks a lot for _your_ help--we still owe you something," replied
Stevens. "If either of your power-plants go sour on you again, or if
you need any more built, be sure to let us know--you can come close
enough to the inner planets now on your own beam to talk to us on the
ultra-communicator. We'll be glad to help you any way we can--and we may
call on you for help again. Goodbye, Barkovis--goodbye, all Titania!"
He made his way through the bitterly cold shop into the control-room of
their lifeboat, and while he was divesting himself of his heavy suit,
Nadia lifted the _Forlorn Hope_ into the blue-green sky of Titan,
accompanied by an escort of the mirrored globes. Well clear of the
atmosphere of the satellite, the terrestrial cruiser shot forward at
normal acceleration, while the Titanian vessels halted and wove a
pattern of blue and golden rays in salute to the departing guests.
"Well, Nadia, we're off--on a long trek, too."
"Said Wun Long Hop, the Chinese pee-lo," Nadia agreed. "Sure
everything's all x, big boy?"
"To nineteen decimals," he declared. "You couldn't squeeze another frank
into our accumulators with a proof-bar, and since they're sending us all
the power we want to draw, we won't need to touch our batteries or tap
our own beam until we're almost to Jupiter. To cap the climax, what it
takes to make big medicine on those spherical friends of ours, we've
got. We're not sitting on top of the world, ace--we've perched exactly
at the apex of the entire universe!"
"How long is it going to take?"
"Don't know. Haven't figured it yet, but it'll be _beaucoup_ days," and
the two wanderers from far-distant Earth settled down to the routine of
a long and uneventful journey.
They gave Saturn and his spectacular rings a wide berth and sped on,
with ever-increasing velocity. Past the outer satellites, on and on,
the good ship _Forlorn Hope_ flew into the black-and-brilliant depths of
interplanetary space. Saturn was an ever-diminishing disk beneath them:
above them was Jupiter's thin crescent, growing ever larger and more
bright, and the Monarch of the Solar System, remaining almost stationary
day after day, increasing steadily in apparent diameter and in
brilliance.
  *  *  *  *  *
Although the voyage from Titan to Ganymede was long, it was not
monotonous, for there was much work to be done in the designing and
fabrication of the various units which were to comprise the ultra-radio
transmitting station. In the various compartments of the _Forlorn Hope_
there were sundry small motors, blowers, coils, condensers, force-field
generators, and other items which Stevens could use with little or no
alteration; but for the most part he had to build everything himself.
Thus it was that time passed quickly; so quickly that Jupiter loomed
large and the Saturnian beam of power began to attenuate almost before
the Terrestrials realized that their journey was drawing to an end.
"Our beam's falling apart fast," Stevens read his meters carefully, then
swung his communicator beam toward Jupiter. "We aren't getting quite
enough power to hold our acceleration at normal--think I'll cut now,
while we're still drawing enough to let the Titanians know we're off
their beam. We've got lots of power of our own now; and we're getting
pretty close to enemy territory, so they may locate that heavy beam.
Have you found Ganymede yet?"
"Yes, it will be on the other side of Jupiter by the time we get there.
Shall I detour, or put on a little more negative and wait for it to come
around to this side?"
"Better wait, I think. The farther away we stay from Jupiter and the
major satellites, the better."
"All x--it's on. Suppose we'd better start standing watches, in case
some of them show up?"
"No use," he dissented. "I've been afraid to put out our
electromagnetic detectors, as they could surely trace them in use.
Without them, we couldn't spot an enemy ship even if we were looking
right at it, except by accident; since they won't be lighted up and
it's awfully hard to see anything out here, anyway. We probably won't
know they're within a million kilometers until they put a beam on us.
Barkovis says that this mirror will reflect any beam they can use, and
I've already got a set of photo-cells in circuit to ring an alarm at
the first flash off of our mirror plating. I'd like to get in the first
licks myself, but I haven't been able to dope out any way of doing it.
So you might as well sleep in your own room, as usual, and I'll camp
here right under the panel until we get to Ganymede. There's a couple
of little things I just thought of, though, that may help some; and
I'm going to do 'em right now."
Putting on his space-suit, he picked up a power drill and went out into
the bitter cold of the outer structure. There he attacked the inner
wall of their vessel, and the carefully established inter-wall vacuum
disappeared in a screaming hiss of air as the tempered point bit through
plate after plate.
"What's the idea, Steve?" Nadia asked, when he had re-entered the
control room. "Now you'll have all that pumping to do over again."
"Protection for the mirrors," he explained. "You see, they aren't
perfect reflectors. There's a little absorption, so that some stuff
comes through. Not much, of course; but enough to kill some of those
Titanians and almost enough to ruin their ship got through in about ten
minutes, and only one enemy was dealing it out. We can stand more than
they could, of course, but the mirror itself won't stand much more heat
than it was absorbing then. But with air in those spaces instead of
vacuum, and with the whole mass of the _Hope_, except this one lifeboat,
as cold as it is, I figure that there'll be enough conduction and
convection through them to keep the outer wall and the mirror cold--cool
enough, at least, to hold the mirror on for an hour. If only one ship
tackles us, it won't be bad--but I figure that if there's only one,
we're lucky."
  *  *  *  *  *
Stevens' fears were only too well grounded, for during the "evening" of
the following day, while he was carefully scanning the heavens for some
sign of enemy craft, the alarm bell over his head burst into its brazen
clamor. Instantly he shot out the detectors and ultra-lights and saw not
one, but six of the deadly globes--almost upon them, at point-blank
range! One was already playing a beam of force upon the _Forlorn Hope_,
and the other five went into action immediately upon feeling the
detector impulses and perceiving that the weapon of their sister ship
had encountered an unusual resistance in the material of that peculiarly
mirrored wedge. As those terrific forces struck her, the terrestrial
cruiser became a vast pyrotechnic set piece, a dazzling fountain of
coruscant brilliance: for the mirror held. The enemy beams shot back
upon themselves and rebounded in all directions, in the same spectacular
exhibition of frenzied incandescence which had marked the resistance of
the Titanian sphere to a similar attack.
But Stevens was not idle. In the instant of launching his detectors,
as fast as he could work the trips, four of the frightful nitrogen
bombs of Titan--all that he could handle at once--shot out into space,
their rocket-tubes flaring viciously. The enemy detectors of course
located the flying torpedoes immediately, but, contemptuous of material
projectiles, the spheres made no attempt to dodge, but merely lashed out
upon them with their ravening rays. So close was the range that they
had no time to avoid the radio-directed bombs after discovering that
their beams were useless against the unknown protective covering of
those mirrored shells. There were four practically simultaneous
detonations--silent, but terrific explosions as the pent-up internal
energy of solid pentavalent nitrogen was instantaneously released--and
the four insensately murderous spheres disappeared into jagged fragments
of wreckage, flying wildly away from the centers of explosion. One great
mass of riven and twisted metal was blown directly upon the fifth globe,
and Nadia stared in horrified fascination at the silent crash as the
entire side of the ship crumpled inward like a shell of cardboard under
the awful impact. That vessel was probably out of action, but Stevens
was taking no chances. As soon as he had clamped a pale blue tractor rod
upon the sixth and last of the enemy fleet, he drove a torpedo through
the gaping wall and into the interior of the helpless war-vessel. There
he exploded it, and the awful charge, detonated in that confined space,
literally tore the globular space-ship to bits.
"We'll show these jaspers what kind of trees make shingles!" he gritted
between clenched teeth; and his eyes, hard now as gray iron, fairly
emitted sparks as he launched four torpedoes upon the sole remaining
globe of the squadron of the void. "I've had a lot of curiosity to know
just what kind of unnatural monstrosities can possibly have such
fiendish dispositions as they've got--but beasts, men or devils, they'll
find they've grabbed something this time they can't let go of," and
fierce blasts of energy ripped from the exhausts as he drove his
missiles, at their highest possible acceleration, toward the captive
sphere so savagely struggling at the extremity of his tractor beam.
But that one remaining vessel was to prove no such easy victim as had
its sister ships. Being six to one, and supposedly invincible, the
squadron had been overconfident and had attacked carelessly, with only
its crippling slicing beams instead of its more deadly weapons of total
destruction; and so fierce and hard had been Stevens' counter-attack
that five of its numbers had been destroyed before they realized what
powerful armament was mounted by that apparently crude, helpless,
and innocuous wedge. The sixth, however, was fully warned, and every
resource at the command of its hellish crew was now being directed
against the _Forlorn Hope_.
Sheets, cones, and gigantic rods of force flashed and crackled. Space
was filled with silent, devastating tongues of flame. The _Forlorn
Hope_ was dragged about erratically as the sphere tried to dodge those
hurtling torpedoes; tried to break away from the hawser of energy
anchoring her so solidly to her opponent. But the linkage held, and
closer and closer Stevens drove the fourfold menace of his frightful
dirigible bombs. Pressor beams beat upon them in vain. Hard driven as
those pushers were, they could find no footing, but were reflected at
many angles by that untouchable mirror and their utmost force scarcely
impeded the progress of the rocket-propelled missiles. Comparatively
small as the projectiles were, however, they soon felt the effects of
the prodigious beams of heat enveloping them, and torpedo after torpedo
exploded harmlessly in space as their mirrors warmed up and volatilized.
But for each bomb that was lost, Stevens launched another, and each one
came closer to its objective than had its predecessor.
Made desperate by the failure of his every beam, the enemy commander
thought to use material projectiles himself--weapons abandoned long
since by his race as antiquated and inefficient, but a few of which were
still carried by the older types of vessels. One such shell was found
and launched--but in the instant of its launching Stevens' foremost bomb
struck its mark and exploded. So close were the other three bombs, that
they also let go at the shock; and the warlike sphere, hemmed in by four
centers of explosions, flew apart--literally pulverized. Its projectile,
so barely discharged, did not explode--it was loaded with material which
could be detonated only by the warhead upon impact or by a radio signal.
It was, however, deflected markedly from its course by the force of the
blast, so that instead of striking the _Forlorn Hope_ in direct central
impact, its head merely touched the apex of the mirror-plated wedge.
That touch was enough. There was another appalling concussion, another
blinding glare, and the entire front quarter of the terrestrial vessel
had gone to join the shattered globes.
Between the point of explosion and the lifeboats there had been many
channels of insulation, many bulkheads, many air-breaks, and compartment
after compartment of accumulator cells. These had borne the brunt of the
explosion, so that the control room was unharmed, and Stevens swung his
communicator rapidly through the damaged portions of the vessels.
"How badly are we hurt, Steve--can we make it to Ganymede?"
Nadia was quietly staring over his shoulder into the plate, studying
with him the pictures of destruction there portrayed as he flashed the
projector from compartment to compartment.
"We're hurt--no fooling--but it might have been a lot worse," he
replied, as he completed the survey. "We've lost about all of our
accumulators, but we can land on our own beam, and landing power is all
we want, I think. You see, we're drifting straight for where Ganymede
will be, and we'd better cut out every bit of power we're using, even
the heaters, until we get there. This lifeboat will hold heat for quite
a while, and I'd rather get pretty cold than meet any more of that gang.
I figured eight hours just before they met us, and we were just about
drifting then. I think it is safe to say seven hours blind."
"But can't they detect us anyway? They may have sent out a call, you
know."
"If we aren't using any power for anything, their electromagnetics are
the only things we'll register on, and they're mighty short-range
finders. Even if they should get that close to us, they'll probably
think we're meteoric, since we'll be dead to their other instruments.
Luckily we've got lots of air, so the chemical purifiers can handle it
without power. I'll shut off everything and we'll drift it. Couldn't do
much of anything, anyway--even our shop out there won't hold air. But we
can have light. We've got acetylene emergency lamps, you know, and we
don't need to economize on oxygen."
"Perhaps we'd better run in the dark. Remember what you told me about
their possible visirays, and that you've got only two bombs left."
"All x; that would be better. If I forget it, remind me to blow up those
before we hit the atmosphere of Ganymede, will you?" He opened all the
power switches, and, every source of ethereal vibrations cut off, the
_Forlorn Hope_ drifted slowly on, now appearing forlorn indeed.
  *  *  *  *  *
Seven hours dragged past: seven age-long hours during which the two sat
tense, expecting they knew not what, talking only at intervals and in
subdued tones. Stevens then snapped on the communicator beam just long
enough to take an observation upon Ganymede. Several such brief glimpses
were taken; then, after a warning word to his companion, he sent out and
exploded the nitrogen bombs. He then threw on the power, and the vessel
leaped toward the satellite under full acceleration. Close to the
atmosphere it slanted downward in a screaming, fifteen-hundred-mile
drive; and soon the mangled wedge dropped down into the little canyon,
which for so long had been "home."
"Well, colonel, home again!" Stevens exulted as he neutralized the
controls. "There's that falls, our power plant, the catapults, 'n'
everything. Now, unless something interrupts us again; we'll run up
our radio tower and give Brandon the long yell."
"How much more have you got to do before you can start sending?"
"Not an awful lot. Everything built--all I've got to do is assemble
it. I should be able to do it easily in a week. Hope nothing else
happens--if I drag you into any more such messes as those we've just
been getting out of by the skin of our teeth, I'll begin to wish that
we had started out at first to drift it back to Tellus in the _Hope_.
Let's see how much time we've got. We should start shooting one day
after an eclipse, so that we'll have five days to send. You see, we
don't want to point our beam too close to Jupiter or to any of the large
satellites, because the enemy might live there and might intercept it.
We had an eclipse yesterday--so one week from today, at sunrise, I
start shooting."
"But Earth's an evening star now; you can't see it in the morning."
"I'm not going to aim at Tellus. I'm shooting at Brandon, and he's never
there for more than a week or two at a stretch. They're prowling around
out in space somewhere almost all the time."
"Then how can you possibly hope to hit them?"
"It may be quite a job of hunting, but not as bad as you might think.
They probably aren't much, if any, outside the orbit of Mars, and
they usually stay within a couple of million kilometers or so of the
Ecliptic, so we'll start at the sun and shoot our beam in a spiral
to cover that field. We ought to be able to hit them inside of twelve
hours, but if we don't, we'll widen our spiral and keep on trying until
we do hit them."
"Heavens, Steve! Are you planning on telegraphing steadily for days at
a time?"
"Sure, but not by hand, of course--I'll have an automatic sender and
automatic pointers."
Stevens had at his command a very complete machine-shop, he had an ample
supply of power, and all that remained for him to do was to assemble the
parts which he had built during the long journey from Titan to Ganymede.
Therefore, at sunrise of the designated day, he was ready, and, with
Nadia hanging breathless over his shoulder, he closed the switch, a
toothed wheel engaged a delicate interrupter, and a light sounder began
its strident chatter.
"Ganymede point oh four seven ganymede point oh four seven ganymede
point oh four seven..." endlessly the message was poured out into the
ether, carried by a tight beam of ultra-vibrations and driven by forces
sufficient to propel it well beyond the opposite limits of the orbit
of Mars.
"What does it say? I can't read code."
Stevens translated the brief message, but Nadia remained unimpressed.
"But it doesn't say anything!" she protested. "It isn't addressed to
anybody, it isn't signed--it doesn't tell anybody anything about
anything."
"It's all there, ace. You see, since the beam is moving sidewise very
rapidly at that range and we're shooting at a small target, the message
has to be very short or they won't get it all while the beam's on
'em--it isn't as though we were broadcasting. It doesn't need any
address, because nobody but the _Sirius_ can receive it--except possibly
the Jovians. They'll know who's sending it without any signature. It
tells them that Ganymede wants to receive a message on the ultra-band
centering on forty-seven thousandths. Isn't that enough?"
"Maybe. But suppose some of them live right here on Ganymede--you'll
be shooting right through the ground all night--or suppose that even if
they don't live here, that they can find our beam some way? Or suppose
that Brandon hasn't got his machine built yet, or suppose that it isn't
turned on when our beam passes them, or suppose they're asleep then?
A lot of things might happen."
"Not so many, ace--your first objection is the only one that hasn't got
more holes in it than a sieve, so I'll take it first. Since our beam is
only a meter in diameter here and doesn't spread much in the first few
million kilometers, the chance of direct reception by the enemy, even
if they do live here on Ganymede, is infinitesimally small. But I don't
believe that they live here--at least, they certainly didn't land on
this satellite. As you suggest, however, it is conceivable that they may
have detector screens delicate enough to locate our beam at a distance;
but since in all probability that means a distance of hundreds of
thousands of kilometers, I think it highly improbable. We've got to take
the same risk anyway, no matter what we do, whenever we start to use any
kind of driving power, so there's no use worrying about it. As for your
last two objections, I know Brandon and I know Westfall. Brandon will
have receivers built that will take in any wave possible of propagation,
and Westfall, the cautious old egg, will have them running twenty-four
hours a day, with automatic recorders, finders, and everything else that
Brandon can invent--and believe me, sweetheart, that's a lot of stuff!"
"It's wonderful, the way you three men are," replied Nadia thoughtfully,
reading between the lines of Stevens' utterance. "They knew that you
were on the _Arcturus_, of course--and they knew that if you were alive
you'd manage in some way to get in touch with them. And you, away out
here after all this time, are superbly confident that they are expecting
a call from you. That, I think, is one of the finest things I ever heard
of."
"They're two of the world's best--absolutely." Nadia looked at him,
surprised, for he had not seen anything complimentary to himself in her
remark. "Wait until you meet them. They're men, Nadia--real men. And
speaking of meeting them--please try to keep on loving me after you meet
Norm Brandon, will you?"
"Don't be a simp!" her brown eyes met his steadily. "You didn't mean
that--you didn't even say it, did you?"
"Back it comes, sweetheart! But knowing myself and knowing those
two...."
"Stop it! If Norman Brandon or Quincy Westfall had been here instead
of you, or both of them together, we'd have been here from now on--we
wouldn't even have gotten away from the Jovians!"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Now it's your turn to back water, guy!"
"Well, maybe, a little--if both of them were here, they ought to equal
you in some things. Brandon says himself that he and Westfall together
make one scientist--Dad says he says so."
"You don't want to believe everything you hear. Neither of them will
admit that he knows anything or can do anything--that's the way they
are."
"Dad has told me a lot about them--how they've always been together
ever since their undergraduate days. How they studied together all over
the world, even after they'd been given all the degrees loose. How
they even went to the other planets to study--to Mars, where they had
to live in space-suits all the time, and to Venus, where they had to
take ultra-violet treatments every day to keep alive. How they learned
everything that everybody else knew and then went out into space to find
out things that nobody else ever dreamed of. How you came to join them,
and what you three have done since. They're fine, of course--but they
aren't _you_," she concluded passionately.
"No, thank Heaven! I know you love me, Nadia, just as I love you--you
know I never doubted it. But you'll like them, really. They're a
wonderful team. Brandon's a big brute, you know--fully five centimeters
taller than I am, and he weighs close to a hundred kilograms--and no
lard, either. He's wild, impetuous, always jumping at conclusions and
working out theories that seem absolutely ridiculous, but they're
usually sound, even though impractical. Westfall's the practical
member--he makes Norm pipe down, pins him down to facts, and makes it
possible to put his hunches and wild flashes of genius into workable
form. Quince is a...."
"Now _you_ pipe down! I've heard you rave _so_ much about those two--I'd
lots rather rave about you, and with more reason. I wish that sounder
would start sounding."
"Our first message hasn't gone half way yet. It takes about forty
minutes for the impulse to get to where I think they are, so that even
if they got the first one and answered it instantly, it would be eighty
minutes before we'd get it. I sort of expect an answer late tonight, but
I won't be disappointed if it takes a week to locate them."
"I will!" declared the girl, and indeed, very little work was done that
day by either of the castaways.
Slowly the day wore on, and the receiving sounder remained silent.
Supper was eaten as the sun dropped low and disappeared, but they felt
no desire to sleep. Instead, they went out in front of the steel wall,
where Stevens built a small campfire. Leaning back against the wall of
their vessel, they fell into companionable silence, which was suddenly
broken by Stevens.
"Nadia, I just had a thought. I'll bet four dollars I've wasted a lot of
time. They'll certainly have automatic relays on Tellus, to save me the
trouble of hunting for them, but like an idiot I never thought of it
until just this minute, in spite of the speech I made you about them.
I'm going to change those directors right now."
"That's quite a job, isn't it?"
"No, only a few minutes."
"Do it in the morning; you've done enough for one day--maybe you've hit
them already, any way."
They again became silent, watching Jupiter, an enormous moon some seven
degrees in apparent diameter.
"Steve, I simply can't get used to such a prodigious moon! Look at the
stripes, and look at that perfectly incredible...."
A gong sounded and they both jumped to their feet and raced madly into
the _Hope_. The ultra-receiver had come to life and the sounder was
chattering insanely--someone was sending with terrific speed, but with
perfect definition and spacing.
"That's Brandon's fist--I'd know his style anywhere," Stevens shouted,
as he seized notebook and pencil.
"Tell me what it says, quick, Steve!" Nadia implored.
"Can't talk--read it!" Stevens snapped. His hand was flying over the
paper, racing to keep up with the screaming sounder.
"...ymede all x stevens ganymede all x stevens ganymede all x placing
and will keep sirius on plane between you and tellus circle fifteen
forty north going tellus first send full data spreading beam to
cover circle fifteen forty quince suggests possibility this message
intercepted and translated personally I think such translation
impossible and that he is wilder than a hawk but just in case they
should be supernaturally intelligent...."
Stevens stopped abruptly and stared at the vociferous sounder.
"Don't stop to listen--keep on writing!" commanded Nadia.
"Can't," replied the puzzled mathematician. "It doesn't make sense. It
sounds intelligent--it's made up of real symbols of some kind or other,
but they don't mean a thing to me."
"Oh, I see--he's sending mush on purpose. Read the last phrase!"
"Oh, sure--'mush' is right," and with no perceptible break the signals
again became intelligible.
"... if they can translate that they are better scholars than we are
signing off until hear from you brandon."
  *  *  *  *  *
The sounder died abruptly into silence and Nadia sobbed convulsively
as she threw herself into Stevens' arms. The long strain over, the
terrible uncertainty at last dispelled, they were both incoherent for
a minute--Nadia glorifying the exploits of her lover, Stevens crediting
the girl herself and his two fellow-scientists with whatever success had
been achieved. A measure of self-control regained, Stevens cut off his
automatic sender, changed the adjustments of his directors and cut in
his manually operated sending key.
"What waves are you using, anyway?" asked Nadia, curiously. "They must
be even more penetrating than Roeser's Rays, to have such a range, and
Roeser's Rays go right through a planet without even slowing up."
"They're of the same order as Roeser's--that is, they're sub-electronic
waves of the fourth order--but they're very much shorter, and hence more
penetrating. In fact, they're the shortest waves yet known, so short
that Roeser never even suspected their existence."
"Suppose there's a Jovian space-ship out there somewhere that intercepts
our beams. Couldn't they locate us from it?"
"Maybe, and maybe not--we'll just have to take a chance on that. That
goes right back to what we were talking about this morning. They might
be anywhere, so the chance of hitting one is very small. It isn't like
hitting the _Sirius_, because we knew within pretty narrow limits where
to look for her, and even at that we had to hunt for her for half a day
before we hit her. We're probably safe, but even if they should have
located us, we'll probably be able to hide somewhere until the _Sirius_
gets here. Well, the quicker I get busy sending the dope, the sooner
they can get started."
"Tell them to be sure and bring me all my clothes they can find,
a gallon of perfume, a barrel of powder, and a carload of Delray's
Fantasie chocolates--I've been a savage so long that I want to wallow
in luxury for a while."
"I'll do that--and I want some real cigarettes!"
Stevens first sent a terse, but complete account of everything that had
happened to the _Arcturus_, and a brief summary of what he and Nadia
had done since the cutting up of the IPV. The narrative finished, he
launched into a prolonged and detailed scientific discussion of the
enemy and their offensive and defensive weapons. He dwelt precisely and
at length upon the functioning of everything he had seen. Though during
the long months of their isolation he had been too busy to do any actual
work upon the weapons of the supposed Jovians, yet his keen mind had
evolved many mathematical and physical deductions, hypotheses, and
theories, and these he sent out to the _Sirius_, concluding:
"There's all the dope I can give you. Figure it out, and don't come at
all until you can come loaded for bear; they're bad medicine. Call us
occasionally, to keep us informed as to when to expect you, but don't
call too often. We don't want them locating you, and if they should
locate us through your ray or ours, it would be just too bad. So-long.
Stevens and Newton."
Nadia had insisted upon staying up and had been brewing pot after pot
of her substitutes for coffee while he sat at the key; and it was
almost daylight when he finally shut off the power and arose, his
right arm practically paralyzed from the unaccustomed strain of hours
of telegraphing.
"Well, sweetheart, that's that!" he exclaimed in relief. "Brandon and
Westfall are on the job. Nothing to do now but wait, and study up on our
own account on those Jovians' rays. This has been one long day for us,
though, little ace, and I suggest that we sleep for about a week!"
CHAPTER VIII
Callisto to the Rescue
All humanity of Callisto, the fourth major satellite of Jupiter,
had for many years been waging a desperate and apparently hopeless
defense against invading hordes of six-limbed beings. Every city and
town had long since been reduced to level fields of lava by the rays
of the invaders. Every building and every trace of human civilization
had long since disappeared from the surface of the satellite. Far
below the surface lay the city of Zbardk, the largest of the few
remaining strongholds of the human race. At one portal of the city a
torpedo-shaped, stubby-winged rocket plane rested in the carriage of a
catapult. Near it the captain addressed briefly the six men normally
composing his crew.
"Men, you already know that our cruise today is not an ordinary patrol.
We are to go to One, there to destroy a base of the hexans. We have
perhaps one chance in ten thousand of returning. Therefore I am taking
only one man--barely enough to operate the plane. Volunteers step one
pace forward."
The six stepped forward as one man, and a smile came over the worn
face of their leader as he watched them draw lots for the privilege of
accompanying him to probable death. The two men entered the body of the
torpedo, sealed the openings and waited.
"Free exits?" snapped the Captain of the Portal, and twelve keen-eyed
observers studied minutely screens and instrument panels connected to
the powerful automatic lookout stations beneath the rims of the widely
separated volcanic craters from which their craft could issue into
Callisto's somber night.
"No hexan radiation can be detected from Exit Eight," came the report.
The Captain of the Portal raised an arm in warning, threw in the guides,
and the two passengers were hurled violently backward, deep into their
cushioned seats, as the catapult shot their plane down the runway. As
the catapult's force was spent automatic trips upon the undercarriage
actuated the propelling rockets and mile after mile, with rapidly
mounting velocity, the plane sped through the tube. As the exit was
approached, the tunnel described a long vertical curve, so that when the
opening into the shaft of the crater was reached and the undercarriage
was automatically detached, the vessel was projected almost vertically
upward. Such was its velocity and so powerful was the liquid propellant
of its rocket motors, that the eye could not follow the flight of the
warship as it tore through the thin layer of the atmosphere and hurled
itself out into the depths of space.
"Did we get away?" asked the captain, hands upon his controls and eyes
upon his moving chart of space.
"I believe so, sir," answered the other officer, at the screens of the
six periscopic devices which covered the full sphere of vision. "No
reports from the rim, and all screens blank." Once more a vessel had
issued from the jealously secret city of Zbardk without betraying its
existence to the hated and feared hexans.
For a time the terrific rocket motors continued the deafening roar of
their continuous explosions, then, the desired velocity having been
attained, they were cut out and for hours the good ship "Bzark" hurtled
on through the void at an enormous but constant speed toward the distant
world of One, which it was destined never to reach.
"Captain Czuv! Hexan radiation, coordinates twenty two, fourteen, area
six!" cried the observer, and the commander swung his own telescopic
finder into the indicated region. His hands played over course and
distance plotters for a brief minute, and he stared at his results in
astonishment.
"I never heard of a hexan traveling that way before," he frowned.
"Constant negative acceleration and in a straight line. He must think
that we have been cleared out of the ether. Almost parallel to us and
not much faster--even at this long range, it is an easy kill unless
he starts dodging, as usual."
As he spoke, he snapped a switch and from a port under the starboard
wing there shot out into space a small package of concentrated
destruction--a rocket-propelled, radio-controlled torpedo. The rockets
of the tiny missile were flaming, but that flame was visible only from
the rear and no radio beam was upon it. Czuv had given it precisely the
direction and acceleration necessary to make it meet the hexan sphere
in central impact, provided that sphere maintained its course and
acceleration unchanged.
"Shall I direct the torpedo in the case the hexan shifts?" asked the
officer.
"I think not. They can, of course, detect any wave at almost any
distance, and at the first sign of radioactivity they would locate and
destroy the bomb. They also, in all probability, would destroy us. I
would not hesitate to attack them on that account alone, but we must
remember that we are upon a more important mission than attacking one
hexan ship. We are far out of range of their electromagnetic detectors,
and our torpedo will have such a velocity that they will have no time to
protect themselves against it after detection. Unless they shift in the
next few seconds, they are lost. This is the most perfect shot I ever
had at one of them, but one shot is all I dare risk--we must not betray
ourselves."
  *  *  *  *  *
Course, lookout, and rank forgotten, the little crew of two stared
into the narrow field of vision, set at its maximum magnification. The
instruments showed that the enemy vessel was staying upon its original
course. Very soon the torpedo came within range of the detectors of the
hexans. But as Captain Czuv had foretold, the detection was a fraction
of a second too late, rapidly as their screens responded, and the two
men of Zbardk uttered together a short, fierce cry of joy as a brilliant
flash of light announced the annihilation of the hexan vessel.
"But hold!" The observer stared into his screen. "Upon that same line,
but now at constant velocity, there is still a very faint radiation,
of a pattern I have never seen before."
"I think ... I believe ..." the captain was studying the pattern,
puzzled. "It must be low frequency, low-tension electricity, which is
never used, so far as I know. It may be some new engine of destruction,
which the hexan was towing at such a distance that the explosion of our
torpedo did not destroy it. Since there are no signs of hexan activity
and since it will not take much fuel, we shall investigate that
radiation."
Tail and port-side rockets burst into roaring activity and soon the
plane was cautiously approaching the mass of wreckage, which had been
the IPV _Arcturus_.
"Human beings, although of some foreign species!" exclaimed the captain,
as his vision-ray swept through the undamaged upper portion of the great
liner and came to rest upon Captain King at his desk.
Although the upper ultra-lights of the Terrestrial vessel had been
cut away by the hexan plane of force, jury lights had been rigged,
and the two commanders were soon trying to communicate with each
other. Intelligible conversation was, of course, impossible, but King
soon realized that the visitors were not enemies. At their pantomimed
suggestion he put on a space-suit and wafted himself over to the airlock
of the Callistonian warplane. Inside the central compartment, the
strangers placed over his helmet a heavily wired harness, and he found
himself instantly in full mental communication with the Callistonian
commander. For several minutes they stood silent, exchanging thoughts
with a rapidity impossible in any language; then, dressed in
space-suits, both leaped lightly across the narrow gap into the still
open outer lock of the terrestrial liner. King watched Czuv narrowly
after the pressure began to collapse his suit, but the stranger made
no sign of distress. He had been right in his assurance that the extra
pressure would scarcely inconvenience him. King tore off his helmet,
issued a brief order, and soon every speaker in the _Arcturus_
announced:
"All passengers and all members of the crew except lookouts on duty will
assemble immediately in Saloon Three to discuss a possible immediate
rescue."
The subject being one of paramount interest, it was a matter of minutes
until the full complement of two hundred men and women were in the main
saloon, clinging to hastily rigged hand lines, closely packed before the
raised platform upon which were King and Czuv, wired together with the
peculiar Callistonian harness. To most of the passengers, familiar with
the humanity of three planets, the appearance of the stranger brought
no surprise; but many of them stared in undisguised amazement at his
childish body, his pale, almost colorless skin, his small, weak legs and
arms, and his massive head.
"Ladies and gentlemen!" Captain King opened the meeting. "I introduce to
you Captain Czuv, of the scout cruiser _Bzarvk_, of the only human race
now living upon the fourth large satellite of Jupiter, which satellite
we know as Callisto. I am avoiding their own names as much as possible,
because they are almost unpronounceable in English or Interplanetarian.
This device that you see connecting us is a Callistonian thought
transformer, by means of which any two intelligent beings can converse
without language. Our situation is peculiar, and in order that you may
understand fully what lies ahead of us, the captain will now speak to
you, through me--that is, what follows will be spoken by Captain Czuv,
of the _Bzarvk_, but he will be using my vocal organs."
"Friends from distant Tellus," King's voice went on, almost without a
break, "I greet you. I am glad, for your sake as well as our own, that
your vessel was able to destroy the hexan ship holding you captive, and
whose crew would have killed you all as soon as they had landed your
vessel and had read your minds. I regret bitterly that we can do so
little for you, for only the representatives of a human civilization
being exterminated by a race of highly intelligent monsters can fully
realize how desirable it is for all the various races of humanity to
assist and support each other. In order that you may understand the
situation, it is necessary that I delve at some length into ancient
history, but we have ample time. In about ..." he broke off, realizing
that the two races had no thought in common in the measure of time.
"One-half time of rotation of Great Planet upon axis?" flashed from
Czuv's brain, and "About five hours," King's mind flashed back.
"It will be about five hours before any steps can be taken, so that I
feel justified in using a brief period for explanation. In the evolution
of the various forms of life upon Callisto, two genera developed
intelligence far ahead of all others. One genus was the human, as you
and I; the other the hexan. This creature, happily unknown to you of the
planets nearer our common sun, is the product of an entirely different
evolution. It is a six-limbed animal, with a brain equal to our own--one
perhaps in some ways superior to our own. They have nothing in common
with humanity, however; they have few of our traits and fewer of our
mental processes. Even we who have fought them so long can scarcely
comprehend the chambers of horror that are their minds. Even were I able
to paint a sufficiently vivid picture with words, you of Earth could not
begin to understand their utter ruthlessness and inhumanity, even among
themselves. You would believe that I was lying, or that my viewpoint was
warped. I can say only that I hope most sincerely that none of you will
ever get better acquainted with them."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Ages ago, then, the human and the hexan developed upon all four of the
major satellites of the Great Planet, which you know as Jupiter, and
upon the north polar region of Jupiter itself. By what means the two
races came into being upon worlds so widely separated in space we know
not--we only know it to be the fact. Human life, however, could not long
endure upon Jupiter. The various human races, after many attempts to
meet conditions of life there by variations in type fell before the
hexans; who, although very small in size upon the planet, thrived there
amazingly. Upon the three outer satellites humanity triumphed, and many
hundreds of cycles ago the hexans of those satellites were wiped out,
save for an occasional tribe of savages of low intelligence who lived in
various undesirable portions of the three worlds. For ages then there
was peace upon Callisto. Here is the picture at that time--upon Jupiter
the hexans; upon Io hexans and humans, waging a ceaseless and relentless
war of mutual extermination; upon the three outer satellites humanity in
undisturbed and unthreatened peace. Five worlds, each ignorant of life
upon any other.
"As I have said, the hexans of Jupiter were, and are, diabolically
intelligent. Driven probably by their desire to see what lay beyond
their atmosphere of eternal cloud, to the penetration of which their
eyesight was attuned, they developed the space-ship; and effected a
safe landing, first upon the barren, airless moonlet nearest them, and
then upon fruitful Io. There they made common cause with the hexans
against the humans, and in space of time Ionian humanity ceased to exist.
Much traffic and interbreeding followed between the hexans of Jupiter
and those of Io, resulting in time in a race intermediate in size
between the parent stocks and equally at home in the widely variant air
pressures and gravities of planet and satellite. Soon their astronomical
instruments revealed the cities of Europa to their gaze, and as soon
as they discovered that the civilization of Europa was human, they
destroyed it utterly, with the insatiable blood lust that is their
heritage.
"In the meantime the human civilizations of Ganymede and Callisto had
also developed instruments of power. Observing the cities upon the other
satellites, many scientists studied intensively the problem of space
navigation, and finally there was some commerce between the two outer
satellites at favorable times. Finally, vessels were also sent to Io
and to Europa, but none of them returned. Knowing then what to expect,
Ganymede and Callisto joined forces and prepared for war. But our
science, so long attuned to the arts of peace, had fallen behind
lamentably in the devising of more and ever more deadly instruments
of destruction. Ganymede fell, and in her fall we read our own doom.
Abandoning our cities, we built anew underground. Profiting from lessons
learned full bloodily upon Ganymede, we resolved to prolong the
existence of the human race as long as possible.
"The hexans were, and are masters of the physical science. They
command the spectrum in a way undreamed of. Their detectors reveal
etheric disturbances at unbelievable distances, and they have at their
beck and call forces of staggering magnitude. Therefore in our cities
is no electricity save that which is wired, shielded, and grounded;
no broadcast radio; no source whatever of etheric disturbances save
light--and our walls are fields of force which we believe to be
impenetrable to any searching frequency capable of being generated.
Now I am able to picture to you the present.
"We are the last representatives of the human race in the Jovian
planetary system. Our every trace upon the surface has been obliterated.
We are hiding in our holes in the ground, coming out at night by stealth
so that our burrows shall not be revealed to the hexans. We are fighting
for time in which our scientists may learn the secrets of power--and
fearing, each new day, that the enemy may have so perfected their
systems of rays that they will be able to detect us and destroy us, even
in our underground and heavily shielded retreats, by means of forces
even more incomprehensible than those they are now employing.
"Therefore, friends, you see how little we are able to do for you, we
a race fighting for our very existence and doomed to extinction save
for a miracle. We cannot take you to Callisto, for it is besieged by the
hexans and the driving forces of your lifeboats, practically broadcast
as they are, would be detected and we should all be destroyed long
before we could reach safety. Captain King and I have pondered long and
have been able to see only one course of action. We are drifting at
constant velocity, using no power, and with all save the most vitally
necessary machinery at rest. Thus only may we hope to avoid detection
during the next two hours.
"Our present course will take us very close to Europa, which the hexans
believe to be like Ganymede, entirely devoid of civilized life. Its
original humanity was totally destroyed, and all its civilized hexans
are finding shelter from our torpedoes upon Jupiter until we of Callisto
shall likewise have been annihilated. The temperature of Europa will
suit you. Its atmosphere, while less dense than that to which you are
accustomed, will adequately support your life. If we are not detected
in the course of the next few hours we can probably land upon Europa in
safety, since its neighborhood is guarded but loosely. In fact, we have
a city there, as yet unsuspected by the hexans, in which our scientists
will continue to labor after Callisto's civilization shall have
disappeared. We think that it will be safe to use your power for the
short time necessary to effect a landing. We shall land in a cavern,
in a crater already in communication with our city. In that cavern,
instructed and aided by some of us, you will build a rocket vessel--no
rays can be used because of the hexans--in which you will be able to
travel to a region close enough to your earth so that you can call for
help. You will not be able to carry enough fuel to land there--in fact,
nearly all the journey will have to be made without power, traveling
freely in a highly elongated orbit around the sun--but if you escape the
hexans, you should be able to reach home safely, in time. It is for the
consideration of this plan that this meeting has been called."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Just one question," Breckenridge spoke. "The hexans are intelligent.
Why are they leaving Europa and Ganymede so unguarded that human beings
can move back there and that we can land there, all undetected?"
"I will answer that question myself," replied King. "Captain Czuv did
not quite do justice to his own people. It is true that they are being
conquered, but for every human life that is taken, a thousand hexans
die, and for every human ship that is lost, twenty hexan vessels are
annihilated in return. While the hexans are masters of rays, the
humans are equally masters of explosives and of mechanisms. They can
hit a perfect score upon any target in free space whose course and
acceleration can be determined, at any range up to five thousand
kilometers, and they have explosives thousands of times as powerful as
any known to us. Ray screens are effective only against rays, and the
hexans cannot destroy anything they cannot see before it strikes them.
So it is that all the hexan vessels except those necessary to protect
their own strongholds, are being concentrated against Callisto. They
cannot spare vessels to guard uselessly the abandoned satellites.
Because of the enormously high gravity of Jupiter the hexans there are
safe from human attack save for ineffectual long-range bombardment, but
Io is being attacked constantly and it is probable that in a few more
years Io also will be an abandoned world. Some of you may have received
the impressions that the hexans are to triumph immediately, but such an
idea is wrong. The humans can, and will, hold out for a hundred years or
more unless the enemy perfects a destructive ray of the type referred
to. Even then, I think that our human cousins will hold out a long time.
They are able men, fighters all, and their underground cities are
beautifully protected."
There was little argument. Most of the auditors could understand that
the suggested course was the best one possible. The remainder were
so stunned by the unbelievable events of the attack that they had no
initiative, but were willing to follow wherever the more valiant spirits
led. It was decided that no attempt should be made to salvage any
portion of the _Arcturus_, since any such attempt would be fraught with
danger and since the wreckage would be of little value. The new vessel
was to be rocket driven and was to be built of Callistonian alloys.
Personal belongings were moved into lifeboats, doors were closed, and
there ensued a painful period of waiting and suspense.
The stated hour was reached without event--no hexan scout had come
close enough to them to detect the low-tension radiation of the vital
machinery of the _Arcturus_, cut as it was to the irreducible minimum
and quite effectively grounded as it was by the enormous mass of her
shielding armor. At a signal from Captain Czuv the pilot of each
lifeboat shot his tiny craft out into space and took his allotted place
in the formation following closely behind the _Bzarvk_, flying toward
Europa, now so large in the field of vision that she resembled more a
world than a moon. Captain King, in the Callistonian vessel, transmitted
to Breckenridge the route and flight data given him by the navigator of
the winged craft. The chief pilot, flying "point," in turn relayed more
detailed instructions to the less experienced pilots of the other
lifeboats.
Soon the surface of Europa lay beneath them; a rugged, cratered, and
torn topography of mighty ranges of volcanic mountains. Most of the
craters were cold and lifeless; but here and there a plume of smoke
and steam betrayed the presence of vast, quiescent forces. Straight
down one of those gigantic lifeless shafts the fleet of space craft
dropped--straight down a full two miles before the landing signal was
given. At the bottom of the shaft a section of the rocky wall swung
aside, revealing the yawning black mouth of a horizontal tunnel. At
intervals upon its roof there winked into being almost invisible points
of light. Along that line of lights the lifeboats felt their way, coming
finally into a huge cavern, against one sheer metal wall of which they
parked in an orderly row. Roll was called, and the terrestrials walked,
as well as they could in the feeble gravity of the satellite, across the
vast chamber and into a conveyance somewhat resembling a railway coach,
which darted away as soon as the doors were shut. For hundreds of miles
that strange tunnel extended, and as the car shot along door after door
of natural rock opened before it, and closed as soon as it had sped
through. In spite of the high velocity of the vehicle, it required
almost two hours to complete the journey. Finally, however, it slowed
to a halt and the Terrestrial visitors disembarked at a portal of the
Europan city of the Callistonians.
"Attention!" barked Captain King. "The name of this city, as nearly as
I can come to it in English, is _WRUZK_. 'Roosk' comes fairly close to
it and is easier to pronounce. We must finish our trip in small cars,
holding ten persons each. We shall assemble again in the building in
which we have been assigned quarters. The driver of each car will lead
his passengers to the council room in which we shall meet."
"Oh, what's the use--this is horrible, horrible--we might as well die!"
a nervous woman shrieked, and fainted.
"Such a feeling is, perhaps, natural," King went on, after the woman had
been revived and quiet had been restored, "but please control it as much
as possible. We are alive and well, and will be able to return to Tellus
eventually. Please remember that these people are putting themselves
to much trouble and inconvenience to help us, desperate as their own
situation is, and conduct yourselves accordingly."
The rebuke had its effect, and with no further protest the company
boarded the small cars, which shot through an opening in the wall and
into a street of that strange subterranean city. Breckenridge, in the
last car to leave the portal, studied his surroundings with interest as
his conveyance darted through the gateway. More or less a fatalist by
nature and an adventurer, of course, since no other type existed among
the older spacehounds of the IPC, he was intensely interested in every
new phase of their experience, and was no whit dismayed or frightened.
  *  *  *  *  *
He found himself seated in a narrow canoe of metal, immediately behind
the pilot, who sat at a small control panel in the bow. Propelled by
electromagnetic fields above a single rail, upon lightly touching and
noiseless wheels, the terrestrial pilot saw with keen appreciation the
manner in which switch after switch ahead of them obeyed the impulses
sent ahead from the speeding car. The streets were narrow and filled
with monorails; pedestrians pursued their courses upon walks attached
to the walls of the buildings, far above the level of the streets. The
walls were themselves peculiar, rising as they did stark, unbroken,
windowless expanses of metal, merging into and supporting a massive
roof of the same silvery metal. Walls and roof alike reflected a soft,
yet intense, white light. Soon a sliding switch ahead of them shot in
and simultaneously an opening appeared in the blank metal wall of a
building. Through the opening the street-car flew, and as the pilot
slowed the canoe to a halt, the door slid smoothly shut behind them.
Parking the car beside a row of its fellows, the Callistonian driver
indicated that the Terrestrials were to follow him and led the way into
a large hall. There the others from the _Arcturus_ were assembled,
facing Captain King, who was standing upon a table.
"Fellow travelers," King addressed them, "our course of action has
been decided. There are two hundred three of us. There will be twenty
sections of ten persons, each section being in charge of one of the
officers of the _Arcturus_. Doctor Penfield, our surgeon, a man whose
intelligence, fairness, and integrity are unquestioned, will be in
supreme command. His power and authority will be absolute, limited only
by the Callistonian Council. He will work in harmony with the engineer,
who is to direct the entire project of building the new vessel. Each of
you will be expected to do whatever he can--the work you will be asked
to do will be well within your powers, and you will each have ample
leisure for recreation, study, and amusement, of all of which you will
find unsuspected stores in this underground community. You will each
be registered and studied by physicians, surgeons, and psychologists;
and each of you will have prescribed for him the exact diet that is
necessary for his best development. You will find this diet somewhat
monotonous, compared to our normal fare of natural products, since it
is wholly synthetic; but that is one of the minor drawbacks that must
be endured. Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I will not be with you. In
some small and partial recompense for what they are doing for us all,
he and I are going with Captain Czuv to Callisto, there to see whether
or not we can aid them in any way in the fight against the hexans. One
last word--Doctor Penfield's rulings will be the products of his own
well-ordered mind after consultation and agreement with the Council of
this city, and will be for the best good of all. I do not anticipate any
refusal to cooperate with him. If, however, such refusal should occur,
please remember that he is a despot with absolute power, and that anyone
obstructing the program by refusing to follow his suggestions will spend
the rest of his time here in confinement and will go back to Tellus in
irons, if at all. In case Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I should not see
you again, we bid you goodbye and wish you a safe voyage--but we expect
to go back with you."
Brief farewells were said and captain and pilot accompanied Czuv to one
of the little street-cars. Out of the building it dashed and down the
crowded but noiseless thoroughfare to the portal. Signal lights flashed
briefly there and they did not stop, but tore on through the portal and
the tunnel, with increasing speed.
"Don't have to transfer to a big car, then?" asked Breckenridge.
"No," King made answer. "Small cars can travel these tubes as well as
the large ones, and on much less power. In the city the wheels touch
the rails lightly, not for support, but to make contacts through which
traffic signals are sent and received. In the tunnels the wheels do
not touch at all, as signaling is unnecessary--the tunnels being used
infrequently and by but one vehicle at a time. No trolleys, tracks, or
wires are visible, you notice. Everything is hidden from any possible
visiray of the hexans."
"How about their power?"
"I don't understand it very well--hardly at all, in fact."
"It is quite simple." To the surprise of both Terrestrials, Czuv was
speaking English, but with a strong and very peculiar accent; slighting
all the vowels and accenting heavily the consonant sounds. "The car no
longer requires my attention, so I am now free to converse. You are
surprised at my knowing your language? You will speak mine after a few
more applications of the thought exchanger. I am speaking with a vile
accent, of course, but that is merely because my vocal organs are
not accustomed to making vowel sounds. Our power is obtained by the
combustion of gases in highly efficient turbines. It is transmitted and
used as direct current, our generator and motors being so constructed
that they can produce no etheric disturbances capable of penetrating
the shielding walls of our city. The city was built close to deposits
of coal, oil, and gas of sufficient amount to support our life for
thousands of years; for from these deposits come power, food, clothing,
and all the other necessities and luxuries of our lives. Strong fans
draw air from various extinct craters, force it through ventilating
ducts into every room and recess of the city, and exhaust it into the
shaft of a quiescent volcano, in whose gaseous outflow any trace of our
activities is, of course, imperceptible. For obvious reasons no rockets
or combustion motors are used in the city proper."
  *  *  *  *  *
Thus Captain Czuv explained to the Terrestrials his own mode of life,
and received from them in turn full information concerning Earthly life,
activity, and science. Long they talked, and it was almost time to slow
down for the journey's end when the Callistonian brought the conversation
back to their immediate concerns.
"My lieutenant and I were upon a mission of some importance, but it is
more important to take you to Callisto, for there may be many things
in which you can help us. Not in rays--we know all the vibrations you
have mentioned and several others. The enemy, however, is supreme
in that field, and until our scientists have succeeded in developing
ray-screens, such as are used by the hexans, it would be suicidal to
use rays at all. Such screens necessitate the projection of pure, yet
dirigible, forces--you do not have them upon your planet?"
"No, and so far as I know such screens are also unknown upon Mars and
Venus, with whose inhabitants we are friendly."
"The inhabitants of all the planets should be friendly; the solar
system should be linked together in intercourse for common advancement.
But that is not to be. The hexans will eventually triumph here, and a
Jovian system peopled by hexans will have no intercourse with any human
civilization save that of internecine war. We, of Callisto, have only
one hope--or is it really a hope? In the South Polar country of Jupiter,
there dwells a race of beings implacably hostile to the hexans. They
seem to invade the country of the hexans frequently, even though they
are apparently repulsed each time. Our emissaries to the South Polar
country, however, have never returned--those beings, whatever they
are, if not actively inimical, certainly are not friendly toward us."
"You know nothing of their nature?"
"Nothing, since our electrical instruments are not sufficiently
sensitive to give us more than a general idea of what is transpiring
there, and vision is practically useless in that eternal fog. We know,
however, that they are far advanced in science, and we are thankful
indeed that none of their frightful flying fortresses have been launched
against us. They apparently are not interested in the satellites, and it
is no doubt due to their unintentional assistance that we have survived
as long as we have."
In the cavern at last, the three men boarded the Callistonian
space-plane and were shot up the crater's shaft. The voyage to
Callisto was uneventful, even uninteresting save at its termination.
The _Bzarvk_, coated every inch as it was with a dull, dead black,
completely absorptive outer coating, entered the thin layer of
Callisto's atmosphere in darkest night, with all rockets dead, with not
a light showing, and with no apparatus of any kind functioning. Utterly
invisible and undetectable, she dove downward, and not until she was
well below the crater's rim did the forward rockets burst into furious
life. Then the Terrestrials understood another reason for the immense
depth of those shafts other than that of protection from the detectors
of the enemy--all that distance was necessary to overcome the velocity
of their free fall without employing a negative acceleration greater
than the frail Callistonian bodies could endure. From the cavern at the
foot of the shaft, a regulation tunnel extended to the Callistonian city
of Zbardk. Portal and city were very like Wruszk, upon distant Europa,
and soon the terrestrial captain and pilot were in conference with the
Council of Callisto.
  *  *  *  *  *
Months of Earthly time dragged slowly past, months during which King and
Breckenridge studied intensively the offensive and defensive systems
of Callisto without finding any particular in which they could improve
them to any considerable degree. Captain Czuv and his warplane still
survived, and it was while the Callistonian commander was visiting his
terrestrial guests, that King voiced the discontent that had long
affected both men.
"We're both tired of doing nothing, Czuv. We have been of little real
benefit, and we have decided that your ideas of us are all wrong. We are
convinced that our personal horsepower can be of vastly more use to you
than our brain-power, which doesn't amount to much. Your whole present
policy is one of hiding and sniping. I think that I know why, but I want
to be sure. Your vessels carry lots of fuel--why can the hexans outrun
you?" Thus did King put his problem.
"They can stand enormously higher accelerations than we can. The very
strongest of us loses consciousness at an acceleration of twenty-five
meters per second per second, no matter how he is braced, and that
is only a little greater than the normal gravity of our enemies upon
Jupiter. Their vessels at highest power develop an acceleration of
thirty-five meters, and the hexans themselves can stand much more than
even that high figure," replied Czuv.
"I thought so. Assume that you traveled at forty-five. Would it disable
you permanently, or would you recover as soon as it was lowered?"
"We would recover promptly, unless the exposure had been unduly
prolonged. Why?"
"Because," said King, "I can stand an acceleration of fifty-four meters
for two hours, and Breckenridge here tests fifty two meters. I can
navigate anything, and Breckenridge can observe as well as any of your
own men. Build a plane to accelerate at forty-five meters and we will
blow those hexans out of the ether. You will have to revive and do the
shooting, however--your gunnery is entirely beyond us."
"That is an idea of promise, and one that had not occurred to any of
us," Czuv replied and work was begun at once upon the new flyer.
When the super-plane was ready for its maiden voyage, its crew of three
studied it as it lay in the catapult at the portal. Dead black as were
all the warplanes, its body was twice as large as that of the ordinary
vessel, its wings were even more stubby, and its accommodations had been
cut to a minimum to make room for the enormous stores of fuel necessary
to drive the greatly increased battery of rocket motors and for the
extra supply of torpedoes carried. Waving to the group of soldiers and
citizens gathered to witness the take-off of the new dreadnought of
space, the three men entered the cramped operating compartment, strapped
themselves into their seats, and were shot away. As usual the driving
rockets were cut off well below the rim of the shaft, and the vessel
rose in a long and graceful curve, invisible in the night. Such was its
initial velocity and so slight was the force of gravity of the satellite
that they were many hundreds of miles from the exit before they began to
descend, and Breckenridge studied his screens narrowly for signs of
hexan activity.
"Do you want to try one of your long-range shots when we find one of
them?" the pilot asked Czuv.
"No, it would be useless. Between deflection by air-currents and the
dodging of the enemy vessels, our effective range is shortened to a few
kilometers, and their beams are deadly at that distance. No, our best
course is to follow the original plan--to lure them out into space at
uniform acceleration, where we can destroy them easily."
"Right," and Breckenridge turned to King, who was frowning at his
controls. "How does she work on a dead stick, Chief?"
"Maneuverability about minus ten at this speed and in this air.
She'd have to have at least fifteen hundred kilometers an hour to be
responsive out here. See anything yet?"
"Not yet ... wait a minute! Yes, there's one now--P-12 on area five.
Give us all the X10 and W27 you can, without using power--we want to
edge over close enough so that she can't help but see us when we start
the rockets."
"Be sure and stay well out of range. I'm giving her all she'll take, but
she won't take much. With these wings she has the gliding angle of a
kitchen sink."
"All x--I'm watching the range, close. Wish we had instruments like
these on the IPV's. We'll have to install some when we get back. All x!
Give her the gun--level and dead ahead!"
Half the battery of rockets burst into their stuttering, explosive roar
of power and the vessel darted away in headlong flight.
"He sees us and is after us--turn her straight up!"
A searing, coruscating finger of flame leaped toward them, but their
calculations had been sound--the hexan was harmless at that extreme
range. King, under the pilot's direction, kept the plane at a safe
distance from the sphere while the satellite grew smaller and smaller
behind them and Czuv lapsed quietly into unconsciousness.
"He's been out for quite a while. Far enough?" asked King.
"All x now, I guess--don't believe they can see the flash from here.
Cut!"
The rockets died abruptly and a blast from the side ports threw
the plane out of the beam--and once out of it, beyond range of the
electromagnetic detectors as they were their coating of absolute black
rendered the craft safe from observation. One dirigible rocket remained
in action, its exhaust hidden from the enemy by the body of the vessel,
and Captain Czuv soon recovered his senses.
"Wonderful, gentlemen!" he exclaimed, as he manipulated the delicate
controls of his gunnery panel. "This is the first time in history that
a Callistonian vessel has escaped from a hexan by speed alone."
An instantaneously extinguished flare of incandescence marked the
passing of the hexan sphere into nothingness, and the cruiser shot back
toward Callisto in search of more prey. It was all too plentiful, and
twenty times the drama was reenacted before approaching day made it
necessary for Czuv to take the controls and dive the vessel into the
westermost landing-shaft of Zbardk. A rousing and enthusiastic welcome
awaited them, and joy spread rapidly when their success became known.
"Now we know what to do, and we had better do it immediately, before
they get our system figured out and increase their own power." King
reported to the Council. "You might send a couple of ships to Europa and
bring back as many of the Tellurian officers as want to come and can be
spared from the work there. They all test above forty-five meters, and
they can learn this stuff in short order. While they're coming, your
engineers can be building more ships like this one."
The new vessel did not make another voyage until nine sister ships
were ready and manned, each with two Terrestrial officers and one
Callistonian gunner. All ten took to the ether at once, and the hexan
fleet melted away like frost-crystals before a summer sun. A few weeks
of carnage and destruction and not a hexan was within range of the
detectors of Callisto--they were gone!
"This is the first time in years that Callisto's air has been free of
the hexans," Czuv said, thoughtfully. "With your help we have reduced
their strength to a fraction of what it was, but they have not given up.
They will return, with a higher acceleration than even you Terrestrials,
powerful as you are, can stand."
"Certainly they will, but you will be no worse off than you were
before--you can return to your own highly effective tactics."
"We are infinitely better off for your help. You have given us a new
lease on life...."
He broke off as a flaring light sprang into being upon the portal board
and the observer of Exit One made his report--there was a hexan vessel
in the air, location 425 over VJ-42.
"There's one left! Let us get him! No, he's ours!" Confused shouts arose
from the bull-pen; but the original superplane was at the top of the
call-board and accordingly King, Breckenridge, and Czuv embarked upon
an expedition more hazardous far than they had supposed--an expedition
whose every feature was relayed to those in the portal by the automatic
lookouts upon the rims and which was ended before a single supporting
Callistonian plane could be launched.
For the enemy vessel was not the last of the low-powered hexan vessels,
as everyone had supposed--it was the first of the high-powered craft,
arriving long before its appearance was expected. Before its terrific
acceleration and savage onslaught, the superplane might as well have
been stationary and unarmed. After his long dive downward, King could
not even leave the atmosphere--the hexan was upon them within a few
seconds, even though the stupendous battery of rockets, full driven,
had roared almost instantly into desperate action. Bomb after bomb
Breckenridge hurled, with full radio control, fighting with every
resource at his command, but in vain. The frightful torpedoes were
annihilated in mid-flight; and nose, tail-assembly, and wings were
sheared neatly from the warplane by a sizzling plane of force. Side
rockets and torpedo tubes were likewise sliced away and the helpless
body of the Callistonian cruiser, falling like a plummet, was caught and
held by a tractor ray. Captor and captive settled toward the ground.
"This is a signal honor," observed Captain Czuv when he had revived. "It
has been many, many cycles since they have taken Callistonians captive.
They kill us at every opportunity. Is it your custom to destroy
yourselves in a situation such as this?"
"It is not. While we live there is hope."
"Not ours. Unless they have made enormous strides in psychological
mechanisms, they cannot tear from our minds any secrets we really wish
to keep. That is useless," he went on, as King lifted a hand-weapon.
"You will have no opportunity whatever to use it," and he was right.
A searing beam of energy drove them out of the vessel, then
electromagnetic waves burned every metallic object out of their
possession. Burning rays herded them into the hexan sphere and into
a small room, whose door clanged shut behind them.
"Ah, two are humans of a strange breed!" a snarling voice barked
from the wall, in the Callistonian language. "Our deductions were
accurate, as usual--it is to the humans of Planet Three, whose bodies
are a trifle less puny than those of the humanity of the satellites,
that we owe our recent reverses. However, those reverses were merely
temporary--humanity, no matter what its breed, shall very shortly
disappear from the satellites. Now, you scum of the Solar System, you
shall be permitted to witness an entrancing spectacle on the way to our
headquarters, where all your knowledge is to be taken from you before
you die, lingeringly and horribly. There is a strange space-vessel
nearing us probably searching for the one we took and which you dogs of
Callisto must have been fortunate enough to take from us before we could
study and kill its human cargo. Watch its destruction and cringe--and
know, in your suffering, that the more you suffer, the greater shall be
our enjoyment."
"I believe that," King acknowledged. As all three prisoners stared at
the wall-screen, upon which was pictured a huge football of scarred grey
steel, Czuv was amazed to see the faces of Breckenridge and King light
up with fierce smiles of pleasure and anticipation.
"You dissemble well," remarked the Callistonian. "That will rob them of
much pleasure."
"They'll get robbed of more than that," King returned. "This is too
good to keep, and since they cannot understand English, I'll tell you
something. I told you about Stevens. He apparently wasn't killed, as
we thought. He must have escaped, and there is the result. That ship
there is far from innocent--her being so far out of range of any of our
power-plants proves that. That vessel is the _Sirius_--the research
laboratory of the IPC--the Inter-Planetary Corporation! It carries the
greatest scientific minds of three of the inner planets, and it is
loaded with pure poison or it wouldn't be here. Oh, you hexans, what you
have got coming to you!"
  *  *  *  *  *
_Concluding a Thrilling New Serial of Interplanetary Life and Travel by
Edward E. Smith, Ph.D._
_Author of "Skylark of Space," and "Skylark Three"_
PART III
Spacehounds of IPC
  _The question of rays--their expanding power for good and evil--is
  receiving increasing attention from scientists. The x-ray has been
  found to be very beneficial, given in certain quantities, but
  extremely inimical to health, and even fatal, if too much exposure
  is given. The powers of the cosmic rays have not been fully
  discovered as yet. And there is no reason to doubt the theory that
  there may be found still more destructive and powerful rays. Even
  wars are becoming a more dangerous plaything for nations of our
  world--to say nothing of other possible enemies from other parts
  of our universe. Stevens and Nadia Newton meet with thrilling
  experiences galore in this concluding instalment._
What Went Before:
  The Interplanetary Vessel _Arcturus_ sets out for Mars, with
  Breckenridge as chief pilot, carrying on board, besides its
  regular crew and some passengers, the famous Dr. Stevens,
  designer of space ships and computer. He checks computations
  made by astronomers stationed in floating observatories, and
  after he has located any trouble and suggests a plan for
  minimizing the hazards of the trip from the earth to Mars he
  reports his findings and suggestions to Mr. Newton, chief of
  the Interplanetary Corporation.
  Stevens then takes Nadia, Mr. Newton's beautiful young daughter,
  on a specially conducted sight-seeing tour of the _Arcturus_
  and thoroughly explains to her all of the works of the vessel.
  Nadia has herself had a good science education. While they
  are down at the bottom of the ship--nearing the end of their
  tour--Stevens feels a barely perceptible movement of the vessel
  from its course. When he turns on the visiplate, he is horrified
  to find that a mysterious ray of unparalleled power has neatly
  sliced the _Arcturus_ in several places.
  Nadia and Stevens are completely separated from the rest of the
  crew and passengers of the ship, so they get into a lifeboat,
  which is equipped for a limited amount of space travel. Despite
  the strict and apparently effective vigilance of the enemy
  destroyer, Stevens and Nadia make their getaway in the lifeboat,
  which they aptly call "Forlorn Hope," and finally make a safe
  landing on Ganymede, where Stevens almost completes a power-plant
  and a radio transmitter, to enable him to communicate with the
  earth or with the IPV _Sirius_, which is used by Westfall and
  Brandon (two of the world's best scientists) as a floating
  laboratory.
  They start for Cantrell's Comet, where Stevens acquires the
  necessary material for his giant transmitting tube, heads back
  to Ganymede, when their ship is cut, top and bottom, by a strong
  ray-beam. Stevens and Nadia soon find that the other ship is
  manned by friendly beings from Saturn. Together they plan against
  their common foes--the Hexans--who are enemies of the universe.
  After helping the Saturnians to repair their power plant, they
  start back to Ganymede, aided by their new friends from the
  frigid civilization. Finally, however, Stevens succeeds in
  connecting, by radio, with the _Sirius_ and his scientist friends
  on board it, who rush to the aid of the two castaways. It is
  while the castaways are captives of the Hexans that help looms
  near.
CHAPTER IX
The _Sirius_ Takes a Hand
The _Sirius_ loafed along through the ether at normal acceleration
just outside the orbit of Mars and a million miles north of the
ecliptic plane. In the control room, which had been transformed into a
bewilderingly complete laboratory, Norman Brandon strode up and down,
waving his arms, his unruly black hair on end, addressing savagely his
friend and fellow-scientist, who sat unmoved and at ease.
"For cat's sake, Quince, let's get busy! They're outside somewhere,
since the police have scoured every cubic kilometer within range of
the power plants without finding a trace of them. We've got the power
question licked right now--with these fields we can draw sixty thousand
kilofranks from cosmic radiation, which is lots more than we'll ever
need. We haven't drawn a frank from a plant in a month, and we've had to
cut our field strength down to a whisper to keep from burning out our
accumulators. We can hunt as far as Neptune easy--we can go to Alpha
Centauri if we want to. This thing of piffling and monkeying around
here's pulling my cork, and for the ten thousand four hundred and sixty
seventh time I say _let's prowl_ and _prowl now_! In fact, I'm getting
so sick of sticking around doing nothing that I'm going out anyway, if
I have to go alone in a lifeboat!"
[Illustration: _The flying fortresses were finally wrenched from the
ground and hurled upward._]
Impetuous and violent as Brandon had always been, never before had he
gone to such lengths as to suggest a disruption of the partnership;
and Westfall, knowing that Brandon, in his most violent moments, never
threatened idly, thought long before he replied.
"You will not go alone, of course. If you insist upon going without
further preparation I will go too, no matter how foolish I think such
a course to be. We have power, it is true, but in all other respects we
are in no condition to meet an opponent having command of such resources
as must certainly be possessed by those who attacked the _Arcturus_.
Our detectors are inefficient, our system of vision is crude, to say
the least, and many other things are still in the experimental stage.
We have not the slightest idea whom or what we may encounter. It is all
too probable that we would simply be throwing away uselessly the lives of
more good men. It is also foolish from a general viewpoint, for as you
already know, we and our assistants happen to be in better position to
study these things than is any one else at the present time. However,
I will compromise with you. We can learn much in a month if you will
really try, instead of wasting time in fuming around the ship and
indulging in these idiotic tantrums. If you will buckle down and really
study the problems confronting us for thirty days, we will set out at
the end of that time, ready or not."
"All x. I hate to do it, but we've been together too long to bust it
up now," and Brandon turned toward his bench. Scarcely had he reached
it when a series of dots and dashes roared from an amplifier. Both men
leaped for the receiver which had so unexpectedly burst into sound,
reaching it just as it relapsed into silence, and from the tape of the
recorder they read the brief message.
"...h four seven ganymede point oh four seve...."
"That's Steve!" yelled Brandon. "Nobody else could build an
ultra-sender! Direction?"
"No need of calculating distance or direction. Ganymede is the third
major satellite of Jupiter."
"Sure. Of course, Quince--never thought of that. Dope enough--point oh
four seven."
As Stevens had told Nadia, the message was completely informing to those
for whom it was intended, and soon Brandon's answer was flying toward
the distant satellite. He then started to call the officers of the
Interplanetary Corporation, but was restrained by his conservative
friend.
"It would be better to wait a while, Norman. In a few hours we will know
what to tell them."
At high acceleration the _Sirius_ drove toward the Jupiter-Earth-North
plane, and Brandon calculated from his own bearings and from the current
issue of the "Ephemeris" the time at which Stevens' reply should be
received. Two minutes before that time he was pacing up and down in
front of the ultra-receiver, and fifteen seconds after it he snapped:
"Come on, Perce, get busy! Shake a leg!"
"Oh, come, Norman; give him a few minutes' leeway, at least," said
Westfall, with amused tolerance. "Even if your calculations are that
accurate--which of course they are," he added hastily at a stormy glance
from hot black eyes, "since we received that message direct, instead of
through one of our relay stations, Stevens probably has been throwing
it around for hours or perhaps days, looking for us, and the shock of
hearing from us at last might well have put him out of control for a
minute or two."
The carrier wave hissed into the receiver, forestalling Brandon's fiery
reply, followed closely by the code signals they had been expecting. As
soon as the story had been told, and while Brandon was absorbed in the
scientific addenda of Stevens, Westfall thoughtfully called up Newton,
Nadia's father.
"Nadia is alive, free, safe, well, and happy," he shot out without
preliminary or greeting, as soon as the now lined features of the
director showed upon the communicator screen, and the careworn
countenance smoothed magically into the keen face of the fighting Newton
of old, as Westfall recounted rapidly the tale of the castaways.
"They apparently have not suffered in any way," he concluded. "All that
Stevens wants is some cigarettes, and your daughter's needs, while
somewhat more numerous than his, seem to be only clothes, powder,
perfume, and candy. Therefore we need not worry about them. The fate of
the others is still unknown, but there seems to be a slight possibility
that some of them may yet be rescued. You may release as much or as
little of this story as may seem desirable. Stevens is still sending
data of a highly technical nature. We shall arrive there at 21:32 next
Tuesday."
  *  *  *  *  *
In due time the message from Ganymede ended and Brandon, with many pages
of his notebook crammed with figures and equations, snapped off the
power of the receiver and turned to his bench. Gone was the storming,
impetuous rebel; his body was ruled solely by the precise and insatiable
brain of the research scientist.
"He's great, that kid Perce! When I see him, I'm going to kiss him
on both cheeks. He's got enough dope on them to hang them higher than
Franklin's kite, and we'll nail those jaspers to the cross or I'm a
polyp! He's crazier than a loon in most of his hunches, but he's filled
four of our biggest gaps. There is such a thing, as a ray-screen, you
kill-joy, and there are also lifting or tractor rays--two things I've
been trying to dope out and that you've been giving me the Bronx cheer
on. The Titanians have had a tractor ray for ages--he sent me complete
dope on it--and the Jovians have got them both. We'll have them in three
days, and it ought to be fairly simple to dope out the opposite of a
tractor, too--a pusher or presser beam. Say, round up the gang, will
you, while I'm licking some of this stuff into shape for you to tear
apart? Where are Venus and Mars? Um ... m ... m. Tell Alcantro and
Fedanzo to come over here pronto--give 'em a special if necessary. We'll
pick up Dol Kenor and Pyraz Amonar on the way--no, get them to Tellus,
too. Then we'll get action quicker. Those four are all I want--get
anybody else you want to come along."
His hands playing over the keys of an enormous calculating machine,
Brandon was instantly immersed in a profound mathematico-physical
problem; deaf and blind to everything about him. Westfall, knowing well
that far-reaching results would follow Brandon's characteristic attack,
sat down at the controls of the communicator. He first called Mars, the
home planet of Alcantro and Fedanzo, the foremost force-field experts of
three planets; and was assured in no uncertain terms that those rulers
of rays were ready and anxious to follow wherever Brandon and Westfall
might lead. Thence to Venus, where Dol Kenor, the electrical wizard,
and Pyraz Amonar, the master of mechanism, also readily agreed to
accompany the expedition. He then called the General-in-Chief of the
Interplanetary Police, requesting a detail of two hundred picked men
for the hazardous venture. These most important calls out of the way,
he was busy for over an hour giving long-distance instructions so that
everything would be in readiness for the servicing of the immense
space-cruiser the following Tuesday night.
Having guarded against everything his cautious and far-seeing mind
could envisage, he went over to Brandon's desk and sat down, smoking
contemplatively until the idea had been roughed out in mathematical
terms.
"Here's the rough draft of the ray screen, Quince. We generate a blanket
frequency, impressed upon the ultra carrier wave. That's old stuff, of
course. Here's the novelty, in equation 59. With two fields of force,
set up from data 27 to 43, it will be possible actually to project a
pure force of such a nature that it will react to de-heterodyne the
blanketing frequency at any predetermined distance. That, of course,
sets up a barrier against any frequency of the blanketed band.
Incidentally, an extension of the same idea will enable us to see
anywhere we want to look--calculate a retransmitting field."
"One thing at a time, please. That screen may be possible, but
those fields will never generate it. Look at datum 31, in which your
assumptions are unsound. In order to make any solution at all possible
you have assumed cosine squared theta negligible. Mathematically, it is
of course vanishingly small compared to the first power of the cosine,
but fields of that type must be _exact_, and your neglect of the square
is indefensible. Since you cannot integrate with the squared term in
place, your whole solution fails."
"Not necessarily. We'll go back to 29, and put in sine squared theta
minus one equal to z sub four. That gives us a coversed sine in 30,
and then we integrate...."
Thus the argument raged, and all the assistants whose work was not
too pressing gathered around unobtrusively, for it was from just such
fierce discussions as this that the ultra-radio and other epoch-making
discoveries had come into being. Yard after yard of calculator paper
was filled with equations and computations. Weirdly shaped curves
were drawn, with arguments at every point--arguments hot and violent
from Brandon, from Westfall cold and precise, backed by lightning
calculations and with facts and diagrams culled from the many abstruse
works of reference, which by this time literally covered the bench and
overflowed upon the floor.
It was in this work that the strikingly different temperaments and
abilities of the two scientists were revealed. Brandon never stood
still, but walked around jerkily, chewing savagely the stem of an
ancient and reeking pipe, gesticulating vigorously, the while his keen
and agile mind was finding a way over, around, or through the apparently
insuperable obstacles which beset their path; by means of mathematical
and physical improvisations, which no one not inspired by sheer genius
could have evolved. Westfall, seated quietly at the calculator,
mercilessly shredded Brandon's theories to ribbons, pointing out their
many flaws with his cold, incisive reasoning and with rapid calculations
of the many factors involved. Then Brandon would find a remedy for each
weakness in turn and, when Westfall could no longer find a single flaw
in the structure, they would toss the completed problem upon a table
and attack the next one with unabated zeal. Brandon, in his light
remark that the two made one real scientist, had far understated
the case--those two brains, each so powerful and each so perfectly
complementing the other, comprised the master-scientist who was to
revolutionize science completely in a few short years.
To such good purpose did they labor that the calculations were
practically finished by the time they reached the earth. There the ship
was serviced with a celerity that spoke volumes for the importance of
her mission--even the _Aldebaran_, the dazzlingly gold-plated queen of
the fleet, waited unattended and disregarded on minus time while the
entire force of the Interplanetary Corporation concentrated upon the
battle-scarred old hulk of the _Sirius_. Brandon was surprised when he
saw the two companies of police, but characteristically accepted without
question the wisdom of any decision of his friend, and cordially greeted
Inspector-General Crowninshield, only a year or so older than himself,
but already in charge of a Division.
"Keen-looking bunch, Crown. Lot of different outfits--volunteers for
special duty from the whole Tellurian force?"
"Yes. Everybody wanted to go, and there threatened to be trouble over
the selection, so we picked the highest ratings from the whole Service.
If there ever was such a thing as a picked force, we shall have it
with us."
"What d'you mean, 'us'? You aren't going, are you?"
"Try to keep me from it! The names of all five of us I-G's were put in
a hat, and I was lucky."
"Well, you may come in handy, at that," Brandon conceded. "And here's
the big boss himself. Hi, Chief!"
"Ho, Brandon! Ho, Westfall!" Newton, Chairman of the Board of Directors
of the IPC, shook hands with the two scientists. "Your Martians and
Venerians are in Lounge Fifteen. I suppose that you have a lot of things
to thrash out, so you may as well start now. Everything is being
attended to--I'll take charge now."
"You going along, too?" asked Brandon.
"Going along, _too_? I'm _running_ this cruise!" Newton declared. "I may
take advice from you on some things and from Crowninshield on others,
but I am in charge!"
"All x--it's a relief, at that," and Brandon and Westfall went to join
their fellow-scientists in the designated room of the space-cruiser.
  *  *  *  *  *
What a contrast was there as the representatives of three worlds
met! All six men were of the same original stock or of a similar
evolution--science has not, even yet, decided the question definitely.
Their minds were very much alike, but their respective environments had
so variantly developed their bodily structures that to outward seeming
they had but little in common.
Through countless thousands of generations the Martians had become
acclimated to a planet having little air, less water, and characterized
by abrupt transitions from searing heat to bitter cold: from
blinding light to almost impenetrable darkness. Eight feet tall
and correspondingly massive, they could barely stand against the
gravitational force of the Earth, almost three times as great as that
of Mars, but the two Martian scientists struggled to their feet as the
Terrestrials entered.
"As you were, fellows--lie down again and take it easy." Brandon
suggested in the common Interplanetarian tongue. "We'll be away from
here very soon, then we can ease off."
"We greet our friends standing as long as we can stand," and, towering
a full two feet above Brandon's own six-feet-two, Alcantro and Fedanzo
in turn engulfed his comparatively tiny hand in a thick-shelled paw
and lifted briefly the inner lids of quadruply-shielded eyes. For the
Martian skin is not like ours. It is of incredible thickness; dry,
pliable, rubbery, and utterly without sensation: heavily lined with
fat and filled throughout its volume with tiny air-cells which make
it an almost perfect non-conductor of heat and which prevent absolutely
the evaporation of the precious moisture of the body. For the same
reasons their huge and cat-like eyes are never exposed, but look
through sealed, clear windows of membrane, over which may be drawn at
will one or all of four pairs of lids--lids transparent, insensible,
non-freezable, air-spaced insulators. Even the air they exhale carries
from their bodies a minimum of the all-important heat and moisture,
for the passages of their nostrils do not lead directly to the lungs,
as do ours. They are merely the intakes for a tortuous system of
tubes comprising a veritable heat-exchanger, so that the air finally
expelled is in almost perfect equilibrium with the incoming supply
in temperature and in moisture content. A grayish tan in color, naked
and hairless--though now, out of deference to Terrestrial conventions,
wearing light robes of silk--indifferent alike to any extreme of heat or
cold, light or darkness: such were the two forbidding beings who arose
to greet their Terrestrial friends, then again reclined.
"I suppose that you have been given to drink?" Westfall made sure that
they had been tendered the highest hospitality of Mars.
"We have drunk full deeply, thanks; and it was not really necessary,
for we drank scarcely three weeks ago."
Brandon and Westfall turned then and greeted the two Venerians,
as different from the Martians as they were from the Terrestrials.
Of earthly stature, form, and strength, yet each was encased in a
space-suit stretched like a drum-head, and would live therein or in
the special Venerian rooms of the vessel as long as the journey should
endure. For the atmosphere of Venus is more than twice as dense as ours,
is practically saturated with water-vapor, carries an extremely high
concentration of carbon dioxide, and in their suits and rooms is held
at a temperature of one hundred and ten degrees Fahrenheit. The lenses
of their helmets were of heavy, yellowish-red composition, protecting
their dead-white skins and red eyes from all actinic rays--for the
Venerian lives upon the bottom of an everlasting sea of fog and his
thin epidermis, utterly without pigmentation, burns and blisters as
frightfully at the least exposure to actinic light as does ours at
the touch of a red-hot iron.
Out in space at last, cruising idly with the acceleration set at a point
bearable for the Martians, Westfall called the meeting to order and
outlined the situation facing them. Brandon then handed around folios of
papers, upon which the Venerians turned the invisible infra-red beams of
the illuminators upon their helmets, thus flooding them with the "light"
to which their retinas were most responsive.
"Here's the data," Brandon began. "As you see from Sheet 1, we can
already draw any amount of power we shall need from cosmic radiation
alone...."
"Perpetual motion--ridiculous!" snapped from the sending disk upon the
helmet of the master of mechanism.
"Not at all, Amonar," put in his fellow Venerian, "any more than
a turbo-generator at the foot of a waterfall is perpetual motion.
Those radiations originate we know not where, probably as a result
of intra-atomic reactions. The fields of force of our hosts merely
intercept these radiations, as a water-driven turbine intercepts the
water. We merely use a portion of their energy before permitting
them to go on, to we know not what end. Truly you have made a notable
achievement in science, Tellurian friends, and we congratulate you upon
its accomplishment. Please proceed."
"Upon the following sheets are described the forces employed by the
Jovians, as we shall call them until we find out who or what they really
are. We will discuss these forces later. For each force we have already
calculated a screen, and we have also calculated various other forces of
our own, with which we hope to arm ourselves before we reach Ganymede.
The problems facing us are complex, since there are some nine thousand
forcebands of the order in which we are working, each differing from all
the others as much as torque differs from tension, or as much as red
differs from green. Therefore we have appealed to you for help, knowing
that we could do but little alone. Alcantro and Fedanzo will supervise
the construction of the generators of the various fields from these
calculations. Dol Kenor will correlate power and electricity to and
with the fields. Westfall and I will help work out the theoretical
difficulties as they arise. Pyraz Amonar, who can devise and build a
machine to perform any conceivable mechanical task, will help us all
in the many mechanical difficulties we shall certainly encounter.
Discussion of any point is now in order."
  *  *  *  *  *
Step by step and equation after equation the calculations and plans
were gone over, until every detail was clear in each mind. Then the men
bent to their tasks; behind them not only the extraordinarily complete
facilities of that gigantic workshop which was the _Sirius_; but also
the full power of the detachment of police--the very cream of the young
manhood of the planet. Week after toilsome week the unremitting labor
went on, and little by little the massive cruiser of the void became
endowed with an offensive and defensive armament incredible. An armament
conceived in the fertile and daring brain of a sheer genius, guided only
by the knowledge that such things were already in existence somewhere;
reduced to working theory by a precise, mathematical logician;
translated into fields of force by the greatest known experts; powered
by the indefatigable efforts of an electrical wizard; made possible by
the artful mechanical devices of the greatest inventor that three worlds
had ever known! Thus it was that they approached Ganymede, ready, with
blanketing screens full out, save for one narrow working band, and
with a keen-eyed observer at every plate. When even the hyper-critical
Westfall was convinced that their preparations were as complete as they
could be made with the limited information at hand, Brandon directed a
beam upon the satellite and tapped off a brief message:
"stevens ganymede will arrive in about ten hours direct carrier beam
toward sun we can detect it and will follow it to wherever you are
sirius."
"ipv sirius," came the reply, "everything here, all x glad to see you
thanks newton and stevens."
Brandon, at the controls, scanning his screens narrowly, dropped the
vessel down to within a mile or two of the point of origin of Stevens'
carrier beam without incident; then spoke to Westfall, at his side, with
a grin.
"Nice layout the kid's got down there, Quince. It's too bad--don't look
like we're going to get any action for our money a-tall. 'Sa shame,
too--what's the use of wasting it, now that we've got it all made?"
"We are not done yet," cautioned Westfall, and even as he spoke an alarm
bell burst into strident clamor--one of their far-flung detector screens
was telling the world that it had encountered a dangerous frequency.
The new ultra-lights flared instantly along the line automatically laid
down by the detector, and upon the closely ruled micrometer screen of
Brandon's desk there glowed in natural color the image of a globular
space-ship, approaching them with terrific speed.
"Men all stationed, of course, Crown?"
"Stationed and ready." Crowninshield, phones at his ears and microphone
at his lips, was staring intently into his own plate.
"Kinda think I'll do most of it from here, but you can't always tell. If
they get inside my guard you all know what to do."
"All x."
Expecting another such hollow victory as the other Hexan vessel had won
over the defenseless _Arcturus_, the small stranger flashed nearer and
nearer that huge and featureless football of armor steel. Within range,
she launched her flaming plane of energy, but this time that Jovian
sheet of force did not encounter unprotected and non-resisting steel.
Upon the outer ray-screen, flaming white into incandescent defense,
the furious bolt spent itself, and in the instant of the launching of
the searing blade of flame, Brandon had gone into action. Switch after
switch drove home, and one after another those frightful fields of
force, those products of the mightiest minds of three planets, were
hurled out against the tiny Jovian sphere. Driven as they were by the
millions upon millions of horsepower stored in the accumulators of the
_Sirius_ they formed a coruscating spherical shell of intolerable energy
all around the enemy vessel, but even their prodigious force was held
at bay by the powerful defensive screens of the smaller space-ship.
But attack the Jovian could not, every resource at her command being
necessary to fend off the terrific counter-attack of her intended prey,
and she turned in flight. Small and agile as she was, the enormous
mass of the _Sirius_ precluded any possibility of maneuvering with
the Jovian, but Brandon had no intention of maneuvering. Rapid as
the motions of the stranger were and frantic as was her dodging, the
terrific forces of the tractor beams of the Interplanetary Vessel
held her in an unbreakable grip, and although she dragged the massive
_Sirius_ hither and thither, she could not escape.
"Hm ... m ... m," mused Brandon. "We seem to be getting nowhere fast.
How much power we using, Mac, and how much have we got coming in?"
"Output eighty-five thousand kilofranks," replied MacDonald, the first
assistant. "Intake forty-nine thousand."
"Not so good--can't hold out forever at that rate. Shove out the
receptor screens to the limit and drive 'em. They figure a top of sixty
thousand, but we ought to pick up a little extra from that blaze out
there. Drive 'em full out or up to sixty-five, whichever comes first.
Can't seem to crush his screens, so I guess we'll have to try something
else," and a thoughtful expression came over his face as he slowly
extended his hand toward another switch, with a questioning glance at
Westfall.
"Better not do that yet, Norman. Use that only as a last resort, after
everything else has failed."
"Yeah--I'm scared to death of trying it, and it isn't necessary yet. He
must have an open slit somewhere to work through, just as we have. I'll
feel around for it a while."
"Is there any way of hetrodyning the new visiray upon the exploring
frequency?"
"Hm ... m.... Never thought of that--it would be nice, too....
I think we can do it, too. Watch 'em, Quince, and holler if they start
anything."
He abandoned his desk and established the necessary connections between
the visiray apparatus and the controls of his board. There was a fierce
violet-white glare from the plate as he closed the switch, and he leaped
back with his hands over his eyes, temporarily blinded.
"Wow, that's hot stuff!" he exclaimed. "It works, all x, to the queen's
taste," as he donned his heavy ray-goggles and resumed his place.
After making certain that the visiray was precisely synchronized and
phased with the searching frequency, he built up the power of that
beam until it was using twenty thousand kilofranks. Then, by delicately
manipulating the variable condensers and inductances of his sensitive
shunting relay circuits, he slowly shifted that frightful rod of energy
from frequency to frequency, staring into the brilliant blankness of his
micrometer screen as he did so. After a few minutes of search the screen
darkened somewhat, revealing the image of the Jovian globe. Brandon
instantly shifted into that one channel the entire power of his attack;
steadying the controls to bring the sphere of the Jovians into the
sharpest possible focus, knowing that he had found the open slit and
that through it there was pouring upon the enemy the full power of his
terrible weapon.
In the fraction of a second before the Jovians could detect the attack
and close the slit, he saw a portion of the wall of their vessel flare
into white heat and literally explode outward in puffs and gouts of
flaming, molten metal and of incandescent gases. But the thrust, savage
as it was, had not been fatal and the enemy countered instantly. Now
that the crushing force of the full-coverage attack was lessened for a
moment, through another slit there poured a beam of energy equal to the
Terrestrials' own--a beam of such intense power that the outer screen
of the _Sirius_ flared from red through the spectrum, to and beyond the
violet, and went black in less than a second, and the inner screen had
almost gone down before Brandon's lightning hands could restore the
complete coverage that so effectively blanketed the forces of the enemy.
"Well, we're back to the _status quo_," announced Brandon, calmly. "It's
a good gag they didn't have time to locate our working slit--if they had
pushed that stuff through our open channel, we'd have gotten frizzled up
some around the edges. As it was, we got the edge on that exchange--take
it from your Uncle Dudley, Quince, that bird knows that he's been
nudged!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Again he searched the entire band for an opening, but could find none.
The enemy had apparently retired into a tightly closed shell of energy.
The small vessel no longer struggled, nor even moved, but was merely
resisting passively.
"Not an open channel, not even one for him to work through--he can't
wiggle. Well, that won't get him anything. We're so much bigger than
he is, that we can outlast him and will get him some time, since he's
bound to run out of power before we do. I don't believe he can receive
anything, sealed up as he is, and he can't have accumulators enough more
efficient than ours to make up the difference, can he, Quince?"
"It is quite possible. For instance, although we have never heard of any
progress being made along such lines, it has been pointed out repeatedly
that synthesis of a radio-active element of very high atomic weight
would theoretically yield an almost perfect accumulator--one many
thousands of times as efficient as ours in mass-to-energy ratio. Then,
too, you realize, of course, that there is a bare possibility that
intra-atomic energy may not be absolutely impossible."
"Nix on that, Quince. I'll stand for a lot, but not for that last idea!
It's hard to say that anything's impossible, of course, except things
made so by definition or by being contrary to observational facts, but
the best work shows that intra-atomic energy is just about as impossible
as anything can well be. It has been shown pretty conclusively that all
ordinary matter is already in its most stable state, so that work must
be done upon any ordinary atom to decompose it. Besides, if he had
either radioactive accumulators or intra-atomic energy, he would have
cut us up long ago. Nope, the answer is that he's probably yelled for
help and is trying to hold out until it gets here," was Brandon's
rejoinder.
"What can we do about it?" asked Quince.
"Don't know yet. I do know, though, that we aren't half as ready for
trouble as I thought we were. There's a dozen things I want to do that
I can't because we haven't got the stuff. Don't say 'I told you so,'
either--I know you did! You're the champion ground-and-lofty thinker of
the century. Alcantro!"
"Here!"
"Round up the gang, will you, and figure me out a screen and a set of
meters that will indicate an open band? We lose too much time feeling
around anyhow, and we're too apt to take one on the chin while we're
doing it. Also, you ought to make it so it'll shoot a jolt into the
opening, while you're at it," said Brandon.
"We shall begin at once," and the massive Martian as he replied, stepped
over to the calculating machine.
"Well, Quince, we can't do much to him this way--he's crawled into a
hole and pulled the hole in after him. Gosh, I wish we had more stuff!"
"After all, we have everything whose necessity and practicability could
have been foreseen in the light of our information. We can, of course,
go further."
"You chirped it! But we can't let things ride this way or we'll get our
hair singed. We'll have to decorate him with the grand slam, I guess."
"Yes, it seems as though the time for emergency measures has arrived."
"Put everything on the center of the band?"
"That is probably the best frequency to use in a case of this kind."
"He can't control, so we'll push him down close to the ground before
we go to work on him--so we don't have so far to fall if anything goes
screwy with the works. Here's hoping nothing gives away!"
The _Sirius_, almost against the flaming screens of the Jovian, and both
vessels very close to the surface of the satellite, Brandon tested the
power leads briefly, adjusted dials and coils, then touched the button
which actuated the relays--relays which in turn drove home the gigantic
switches that launched a fearsome and as yet untried weapon. Instantly
released, the full seven hundred thousand kilofranks of their stupendous
batteries of accumulators drove into the middle frequency of the
attacking band, and Brandon's heart was in his mouth as he stared into
the plate to see what would happen. He saw! Everything in the _Sirius_
held fast, and under the impact of the inconceivable plane of force, the
screens of the enemy vessel flared instantly into an even more intense
incandescence and in that same fleeting instant went down, and all
defenses vanished as the metal sphere fell apart into two halves, as
would an apple under the full blow of a broad-axe.
Brandon quickly shut off his power and stared in relief into the central
compartment of the globular ship of space, now laid open, and saw there
figures, one or two of which were moving weakly. As he looked, one of
these feebly attempted to raise a peculiar, tubular something toward a
helplessly fettered body. Even as Brandon snatched away the threatening
weapon with a beam of force, he recognized the captive.
"Great Cat, there's Breckenridge!" he gasped, and directed a lifting
beam upon the bound and unconscious prisoner. Rapidly, but carefully, he
was brought through the double airlock and into the control room, where
his shackles were cut away and where he soon revived under vigorous and
skilful treatment.
"Any more of you in there? Did I hit any of you with that beam?"
demanded Brandon, intensely, as soon as Breckenridge showed signs of
understanding.
"King's in there somewhere, and there's a Callistonian human being that
you mustn't kill," the chief pilot replied, weakly and with great effort
in every word. "Don't believe that you hit anybody direct, but the shock
was pretty bad." Having delivered his message, he lay back, exhausted.
"All x. Crown, give me a squad...."
"Not on your life!" barked the general. "This is my job and I'll do it
myself. Your job is fighting the _Sirius_--stay with it!"
"Not in seven thousand years--I'm in on this, too," Brandon protested,
but was decisively overruled by Newton.
"You belong right here at this board, since no one else can handle it
the way you can. Stay here!" he commanded.
"All right," grudgingly assented the physicist, and held the _Sirius_
upright, with her needle-sharp stern buried a few feet deep in the
ground.
He watched the wreckage jealously while Crowninshield and forty helmeted
men issued from the service door in the lower ultra-light compartment
and advanced upon the two halves of the enemy vessel. As no hostile
demonstrations ensued, scaling ladders were quickly placed and with
weapons at the alert the police boarded the hemispheres, manacled the
still helpless beings visible, and, after laying down a fog of
stupefying gas, vanished into compartments beyond the metal partitions.
After a short time they reappeared and climbed down the scaling ladders,
carrying several inert forms, and Brandon spoke into his transmitter.
"King all x, Crowninshield?"
"I think so. Not being in the control room he was not as badly shocked
by the passage of the beam as were Breckenridge and those you saw. The
things in the other rooms were about ready to fight, so we gave them a
little whiff of tritylamin, but Captain King will be as good as ever in
a few minutes."
"Fine business!" The police entered the _Sirius_, the service doors
clanged shut, and Brandon turned to Westfall.
"While they're coming up, I guess I'll pick up Perce and Miss Newton.
We'd better get them aboard and beat it, while we're all in one piece!"
But even before he could send out the exploring beam of his
communicator, the voice of Stevens came from the receiver.
"Hi, Brandon and Westfall! We've watched the whole show.
Congratulations, fellows! Welcome to Ganymede! You are in our
valley--we're upstream from you about three hundred meters; just below
the falls, on the meadow side."
"All x," Brandon acknowledged. "We saw you. Come on out where we can
pick you up. We've got to get away from here, and get away fast!"
"We'll carry off the pieces of that ship, too, Quince--we may be able to
get a lot of pointers from it," and Brandon swung mighty tractor beams
upon the severed halves of the Jovian vessel, then extended a couple of
smaller rays to meet the two little figures racing across the smooth
green meadow toward the _Sirius_.
CHAPTER X
Among Friends at Last
The time for the landing of the _Sirius_ was drawing near, and the
castaways upon Ganymede had donned their only suits of earthly clothing,
instead of the makeshifts of mole-skin, canvas, and leather they had
been wearing so long. Thorns and underbrush had pierced and torn their
once natty outing costumes, and sparks and flying drops of molten metal
from Stevens' first crude forges had burned in them many gaping holes.
"I did the best I could with them, Steve, but they look pretty crumby,"
Nadia wrinkled her nose as she studied the anything but invisible seams,
darns, and staring patches everywhere so evident, both in her own
apparel of gray silk and in the heavy whipcord clothing of her
companion.
"You did a great job, considering what you had to work with," he
reassured her. "Besides, who cares about a few patches? I feel a lot
more civilized in my own clothes, don't you?"
"Well ... yes," she admitted. "They're silk, anyway, even if they don't
look like much, and I'm just reveling in the feel of them next to me
after the horrible, rough, scratchy things I've been wearing. See
anything yet?"
"Not yet." Stevens had been scanning the heavens with a pair of
binoculars. "That doesn't mean much, though, as they'll be just about in
the sun and they'll be coming like a scared dog. Might as well put away
these glasses--we probably won't be able to see them until they're right
on top of us."
"What shall we take with us?"
"Don't know--nothing, probably, since they must have a campaign already
mapped out. I'd like to salvage a lot of this junk, but I'm afraid we
won't be able to. I'm going to take my bow and arrows, though, aren't
you?"
"Absolutely! That's one thing that's better than anything I ever had on
Earth. This bow of mine is perfect."
"There they are! Three rousing cheers! Say, but that old hulk looks good
to me!"
"Doesn't she, though!" cried Nadia, vibrant with excitement. "You know,
Steve. I've hardly dared really to believe it until this very minute. Oh
look! What's that?"
The _Sirius_ had stopped in midair and they could see, far in the
distance, the tiny sphere of the Jovians, rushing to the attack.
"Oh, how horrible!" cried the girl, her voice breaking. "I'm afraid,
Steve...."
"You needn't be, ace. I've told you they won't go off half-cocked as
long as Westfall is on the job. They're ready for anything, or they
wouldn't be here--but just the same I wish that they had that Titanian
mirror and a couple of those bombs!"
In a moment more the Jovian plane of force was launched, the powerful
ray-screens flared into white-hot, sparkling defense, and the battle was
on. Held spell-bound as the castaways were by that spectacular duel, yet
Stevens' trained mind warned him of the perils of their position.
"Grab your bow and we'll beat it!" and he rapidly led her away from the
steel structures to an open hillside, well away from any projection,
tree, or sharp point of rock. "If that keeps up very long, we're going
to see some real fireworks, and I don't know whether there will be
enough left of our plant here to salvage or not. Everything is grounded,
of course, but I don't believe that ordinary grounds will amount to much
against what's coming."
"What _are_ you talking about?" demanded Nadia.
"Look!" he replied, pointing, and as he spoke, a terrific bolt of
lightning launched itself from the incandescent screen of the Jovian
vessel upon their slender ultra-radio tower, which subsided instantly
into a confused mass of molten and twisted metal.
  *  *  *  *  *
As the power of the beams was increased and as the combatants drew
nearer and nearer the ground, the lightning display grew ever more
violent. Well below the canyon as the warring vessels were, the
power-plant and penstock did not suffer at all and only a few discharges
struck the _Forlorn Hope_--discharges which were carried easily to
ground by the enormous thickness of her armor--but every prominent
object for hundreds of yards below the _Hope_ was literally blasted out
of existence. Radio tower, directors and fittings; trees, shrubs, sharp
points of rock--all were struck again and again; fused, destroyed,
utterly obliterated by the inconceivable energy being dissipated by
those impregnable screens of force. Even almost flat upon the ground as
the spectators were, each individual hair upon their heads strove
fiercely to stand erect, so heavily charged was the very air. Stevens'
arm was blue for days, such was Nadia's grip upon it, and she herself
could scarcely breathe in that mighty arm's constriction--but each was
conscious only of that incredibly violent struggle, of that duel to the
death being waged there before their eyes with those frightful weapons,
hitherto unknown to man. They saw the _Sirius_ triumphant, and Stevens
led the dancing girl back into their dwelling of steel.
"Danger's all over now. Radio's gone, but we should fret a lot about
that. It has done its stuff--we can use the communicators. And now,
sweetheart, I'm going to kiss you--for the first time in seven
lifetimes."
Locked in each other's arms, they watched the scene until Stevens
thought it time to send his message. Then, running hand in hand toward
the huge space-cruiser, they were snatched apart and drawn up toward the
double airlocks of the main entrance. Pressure gradually brought up to
normal, they were ushered into the control room, where Nadia glanced
around quickly and almost took her father off his feet by her
tempestuous rush into his arms.
"Oh, Daddy darling. I just knew you'd come along! I haven't seen
you for a million years!" she exclaimed, rapturously. "And Bill,
too--wonderful!" as she fervently embraced a young man wearing the
uniform of a lieutenant of Interplanetary Police. "Ouch, Bill--you're
breaking all my ribs!"
"Well, you cracked three of mine. Maybe you don't know how husky you
are, but you've got a squeeze like a full grown boa constrictor!" He
held her off at arms' length and studied her with admiration. "Gee,
it's fine to see you again, Sis. You're looking great, too--I think
I'll bring my girl out here to live. You always were a knockout, but
now you're the loveliest thing I ever saw!"
He made his way through the group surrounding Stevens, while Nadia and
her father talked earnestly.
"I'm Bill Newton. Thanks," he said, simply, holding out his hand, which
was taken in a bone-crushing grip.
"Bring him over here, Bill!" Nadia called before Stevens could find
a reply.
"I don't know how to say anything, Stevens," the officer continued, in
embarrassment, as the two men turned to obey the summons. "She's a good
kid, and we think a lot of her. We'd about given her up. We.... She....
Oh, rats, what's the use? You know what I mean. You're there, Stevens,
like a...."
"Clam it, ace!" Stevens interrupted. "I get you, to nineteen decimals.
And you don't half know just what a good kid she really is. She's the
reason we're here--we were down pretty close to bed-rock for a while,
she stood up when I wilted. She's got everything. She...."
"Clam it yourself, Steve! Don't believe a word of it, Dad and Bill.
_Wilt_!" Nadia's voice dripped scorn. "Why, he di...."
"Please!" Newton's voice was somewhat husky as he silenced the clamor of
the three young people, all talking at once. "I will not embarrass you
further by trying to say something that no words can express. You told
me that you would take care of her, and I learn that you have done so."
"I did what I could, but most of the credit belongs to her, no matter
what she says," Stevens insisted. "Anyway, sir, here she is; alive, well
and ... unharmed," and his eyes bore unflinchingly the piercing gaze of
the older man, who was reassured and pleased by what he read therein.
"One thing I want to say right now, though, that may make you feel like
canceling the welcome. I loved Nadia even before the _Arcturus_ was
attacked, and since then, coming to know her as I have, the feeling
hasn't lessened any."
"Nadia has already told me all about you two," said her father, "and the
welcome stands. If you could take care of her as well as you have done
since you left the _Arcturus_, I have no doubt of your ability to take
care of her for life. We have been examining the work you have done
here, son, and the more I saw of it the more amazed I became that you
could have succeeded as you did. We are deeply indebted.... Just a
minute! There's my call--I'm wanted in Fifteen. I'll see you again
directly."
"Hi, Norm!" Stevens further relieved the surcharged atmosphere.
"As soon as you and Quince can leave those controls come over and see us,
will you?"
"All x--coming up!" sounded Brandon's deep and pleasant bass, and the
two rescuers, who had tactfully avoided the family reunion, came over
and greeted the third of their triumvirate.
"Ho, Perce--you look fit." Brandon ran an expert hand over Stevens'
arm and shoulder. "Looks as if he might last a round or two, doesn't
he, Quince?"
"You are looking fine, Steve. Neither of you appear any the worse for
your experiences. So this is Nadia? We have heard of you, Miss Newton."
"I believe that, knowing Dad," she replied. "Thanks, both of you, for
digging us out. I've heard about you two, and I'm going to kiss you
both."
Westfall, the silent and reserved, was taken aback, but Brandon met her
more than half-way.
"All x, Nadia--payment in full received and hereby acknowledged," he
laughed, as he allowed her feet to return to the floor. "Even if it was
some stout lads from Mars and Venus that did all the work we'll take the
reward--especially since Alcantro and Fedanzo couldn't feel even such a
high-voltage salute as that one was, and I can't picture you kissing a
Venerian even if you could get to him. Whenever you get lost again, be
sure to let us know, now that you've got our address. If I know Perce at
all, you've heard of us 'til you're sick of it and us--it's a weakness
of his--talking too much."
"Why, it's no such th...." began Nadia, but broke off as an aide came up
and saluted smartly.
"Pardon me, but General Crowninshield requests that Doctor Brandon,
Doctor Westfall, and Doctor Stevens join the council in Lounge Fifteen
as soon as convenient." He saluted again and turned away.
"Yes, that's right, folks--we've got to take a lot of steps, fast--see
you later," and Brandon, taking each of the other two by an arm, marched
them away toward the designated assembly room.
  *  *  *  *  *
There, already seated at a long table, were Czuv, King, and
Breckenridge, all fully recovered, engaged in earnest conversation with
Newton and Crowninshield. Alcantro and Fedanzo, the Martian scientists,
were listening intently, as were the two Venerians Dol Kenor and Pyraz
Amonar. The eyes of the three newcomers, however, did not linger upon
the group at the table, but were irresistibly drawn to one corner of the
room, where six creatures lay in the heaviest manacles afforded by the
stores of the Interplanetary Police. Not only were they manacled, but
each was facing a ray-projector, held by a soldier whose expression
showed plainly that he would rather press the lethal contact than not.
"Oh--those the things we're fighting?" Brandon stopped at the threshold
and stared intently at the captive hexans. Goggling green eyes glaring
venomously, they were lying quiet, but tense; mighty muscles ready to
burst into berserk activity should the attention of a guard waver for
a single instant.
But little more than half as large as the savage creatures with whom
Stevens had fought in the mountain glade upon Ganymede, the hexans
resembled those aborigines only as civilized men might resemble gigantic
primordial savages of our own Earth. Brandon's gaze went from short,
powerful legs up a round, red body to the enormous, freakish double pair
of shoulders, with its peculiar universal jointing. From the double
shoulders sprang four limbs, the front pair of which were undoubtedly
arms, terminating in large, but fairly normal, hands. The intermediate
limbs were longer than the legs and were much more powerful than the
arms, and ended in members that were very evidently feet and hands
combined. What in a human being would be the back of the hand was the
sole of the foot--when walking upon that foot the long and dexterous
thumb and fingers were curled up, out of the way and protected from
injury, in the palm of the hand. From the monstrous shoulders there
rose a rather long and very flexible, yet massive and columnar neck,
supporting a head neither human nor bestial--a head utterly unknown to
Terrestrial history or experience. The massive cranium bespoke a highly
developed and intelligent brain, as did the three large and expressive,
peculiar, triangular eyes. The three sensitive ears were very long,
erect, and sharply pointed. Each was set immediately above an eye, one
upon each side of the head and one in front. Each ear was independently
and instantly movable in any direction, to catch the faintest sound.
The head, like the body and limbs, was entirely devoid of hair. The
horns, so prominent in the savages Stevens had seen, were in this highly
intelligent race but vestigial--three small, sharp, black protuberances
only an inch in length, one surmounting each ear, outlining the lofty
forehead. The nose occupied almost the whole middle of the face and was
not really a nose--it developed into a small and active proboscis. The
chin was receding almost to the point of disappearance, so that the
mouth, with its multiple rows of small, sharp, gleaming-white teeth, was
almost hidden under the face instead of being a part of it. Such were
the hexans, at whom the Big Three stared in undisguised amazement.
"Attention, please!" Newton called the meeting to order. "We have
learned that all the passengers of the _Arcturus_, and all the crew save
three, are alive and safe for the time being. Most of them are upon the
satellite Europa. However, I understand that we are not yet sufficiently
well armed to withstand such an attack in force as will certainly
develop when we move to rescue them. This seems to be a war of applied
physics--Doctor Brandon, as spokesman for the Scientific forces of the
expedition, what are your suggestions?"
"Anticipating an attack in response to signals probably sent out by the
enemy," replied Brandon. "I headed directly south immediately. We are
now well south the ecliptic, and are traveling at considerably more than
full Martian acceleration. Before making any suggestions, I should like
to hear from Captain Czuv, who is more familiar than we are with the
common enemy. Are they apt to follow us: can they detect us if we should
drift at constant velocity; and can we search the brains of the
prisoners with his Callistonian thought-exchanger, if he should build
one with our help?"
"If they are close enough to us to overtake us without too much lost
time, they will certainly attack us," Czuv answered at a nod from
Newton. "Ordinarily they would pursue us to the limits of the Solar
System if necessary, but since they have suffered reverses of late and
cannot spare any vessels, they will probably not pursue us far. Yes,
they can detect us, even without the driving rays, since this vessel
uses much low-tension, low-frequency electricity in its automatic
machinery, lights, and so on. No; our thought-transformer cannot take
thoughts by force, and the hexans will exchange no ideas with us. They
are implacable and deadly foes of all humanity, irrespective of planet
or race. Mercy is to them unknown--they neither give nor take quarter."
"I can bear him out in that," Crowninshield interposed grimly. "The
first one to recover snapped our ordinary handcuffs like so much thread
and literally tore four men to pieces before the rest of us could ray
him. Will you need me longer, Director Newton?"
"I think not. General. Captain Czuv, you have made no headway with
them?" asked the Director.
"None whatever, as I foretold. They understand me thoroughly, since two
of them speak my own tongue, but nothing that they have said can ever
be repeated here. I knew from the first that all such attempts would be
fruitless, but I have tried--and failed. I suggest what I suggested at
first--put them to death, here and now, as they lie there, for most
assuredly they will in some way contrive to take toll of lives of your
own humanity if you allow them to live."
"You may be right," said Newton, "but neither the General nor myself
can give the order for their death, since Interplanetary law does not
countenance such summary action. However, the guards are fully warned of
the peril, and will ray every prisoner at the first sign of unruliness.
General Crowninshield, you may remove the prisoners and deal with them
in accordance with...."
  *  *  *  *  *
Pandemonium reigned. At Crowninshield's signal for the guards to leave
the room with their captives, all six had strained furiously at their
bonds and three of them had broken free in a flash, throwing themselves
upon the guards with unthinkable ferocity. Stevens, seeing a
ray-projector in a hand of one of the prisoners, hurled his heavy chair
instantly and with terrific force. The projector flew into the air,
shattered and useless, while the hexan was knocked into a corner by the
momentum of the massive projectile and lay there, stunned and broken.
Brandon, likewise reacting instantaneously, had bent over and seized
a leg of the table, bracing his knee against the corner. With a mighty
lunge of his powerful body he wrenched out the support and with a
continuation of the same motion, he brought the jagged oak head of his
terrible club down full upon the crown of the second hexan, who had
already torn one guard apart and was leaping toward Czuv, his hereditary
foe. In midflight he was dashed to the floor, his head a shapeless,
pulpy mass, and Brandon, bludgeon again aloft, strode deeper into the
fray. For a brief moment searing lethal beams probed here and there,
chains clanked and snapped, once more that ponderous and irresistible
oaken mace fell like the hammer of Thor, again spattering brains and
blood abroad as it descended--then again came silence. The six erstwhile
prisoners lay dead, but they had taken five of the guards with
them--literally dismembered, hideously torn limb from limb by the
superhuman, incredible physical strength and utter ferocity of the
hexans.
By common consent the meeting was adjourned to another room, for the
business in hand could not be postponed.
"Captain Czuv was right--we Tellurians could not believe in the
existence of such a race without the evidence of our own senses." Newton
reopened the meeting. "From this time on we take no prisoners. Doctor
Brandon, you may resume."
"The detectors and lookouts will give ample warning of any attack, and
Doctor Westfall has suggested that we should have all possible facts
at hand before we try to decide upon a course of action. We should like
to hear the full reports of Captain King, Captain Czuv, Chief Pilot
Breckenridge, and Doctor Stevens."
The four men told their stories tersely and rapidly, while the others
listened in deep attention. As the last speaker sat down, Newton again
turned to Brandon, who silently jerked his head at Westfall, knowing his
own inadequacy in such a situation--realizing that here was needed
Westfall's cold and methodical thinking.
"Director Newton and gentlemen," Westfall spoke calmly and precisely.
"We have much to do before we can meet the hexans upon equal terms.
We have many new fields of force and rays to develop, of whose nature
and necessity Doctor Brandon is already aware. Then, too, we must
recalculate our visirays so that we can operate at greater range and
efficiency. We must also examine the hexan space-ship which is towing,
to do which it will be desirable to drift at constant velocity for a
time. In it we may find instruments or devices as yet unknown to us.
It also occurs to me that since this is an Interplanetary Police problem
of the first magnitude, we should at once get in touch with Police
Headquarters, so that the Peace Fleet can be armed as we ourselves are,
or shall be, armed; for a large and highly efficient fleet will be
necessary to do that which must be done. It is, of course, a foregone
conclusion that Interplanetary humanity will support the humanity of
Callisto against the hexans.
"It is also self-evident that we must stay here and rescue the
Tellurians now upon Europa and Callisto, but we are not yet in position
to decide just how that rescue is to be accomplished. Four courses are
apparently open to us. First, to attempt it as soon as we shall have
strengthened our armament as much as is now possible. That would invite
a massed attack, and in my opinion would be foolish--probably suicidal.
Second, to stand by at a distance until the rocket-ship is launched,
then to escort it back to the Earth. Third, to aid the Callistonians as
much as possible while awaiting the completion of the rocket-vessel.
Fourth, and perhaps the most feasible and quickest, it may be possible
for the Callistonian rocket-ships to bring out fellow-Tellurians, a few
at a time, to us here out in space, since they are apparently able to
come and go at will. However, I would recommend that we make no plans
for the rescue as yet--there is little use in attempting to deal with an
ever-changing situation until we are ready to act forthwith. I suggest
that we strengthen our offensive and defensive armament first, then
secure information as to the exact status of affairs, both upon Callisto
and upon Europa. Then, ready to act, we will do at once whatever seems
called for by the situation then obtaining."
"The program as outlined seems eminently sensible. Are there any
comments or suggestions?" None having been offered, Director Newton
adjourned the meeting and each man attacked his particular problem.
True to Czuv's prediction the hexans did not deem it worthwhile to
pursue the Terrestrial vessel, so obviously and so earnestly fleeing
from them, and shortly, the acceleration was cut off, to render possible
a thorough study of the two halves of the spherical warship of the
enemy. Scientists donned space-suits and studied every feature of
the strange vessel, while mechanics dismantled and transferred to the
_Sirius_ every device and instrument of interest. One or two novel and
useful applications of rays and forces were found, their visirays and
communicators in particular being of a high degree of efficiency; but
upon the whole the science of the hexans was found to be inferior to
that now known to the scientists of Interplanetary's flying laboratory.
Brandon studied the hexan power-system most carefully, and, everything
in readiness and after a long talk with Westfall, he called a general
conference in the control-room.
"Gentlemen, we have done about everything we can do for the time being.
By combining the best features of the visirays and communicators of
the hexans with our own newly-perfected devices, we now have a really
excellent system of communication. Our friends from Mars and Venus
have so altered and enlarged our force-controls that our offensive
and defensive fields, rays, and screens leave little to be desired.
In power we are far ahead of the enemy. They apparently know nothing
of the possibilities of cosmic radiation, but depend upon tight-beam
transmission from their own power-plants--which transmission they have
perfected to a point far beyond anything reached by us of the three
planets. They do not use accumulators, and therefore their dissipation
is limited to their maximum reception, which is about seventy thousand
kilofranks. Since we can dissipate ten times that amount of energy, we
could withstand, for a short time, the simultaneous attacks of ten of
their vessels. Eleven or more of them, however, would be able to crush
our defensive screens--and Captain Czuv has seen as many as a hundred of
their space-ships in one formation. Furthermore, since they have several
times our maximum acceleration, they could concentrate quickly upon any
desired point. We could not escape them by flight if they really set out
to overtake us, which they certainly will do if we again venture into
their territory. Therefore it is clear that we cannot subject ourselves
to any attack in force and it follows that we cannot do much of anything
until the police fleet of some five hundred vessels can be re-armed and
can join us near Callisto. This will require several months at best.
As you already know, it has been decided that we should not return to
any of the minor planets, as to do so might invite a hexan attack upon
our police fleet which is as yet unprepared. We are now heading for
Uranus, in the hope that such a course will distract the attention of
the hexans from Tellus, even though they probably already know that we
are Tellurians. Our new communicator ray will reach any member of the
Jovian system from this point. It has been decided that it is safe to
use it, since it employs an almost absolutely tight beam of very small
diameter, and since we know that that one hexan vessel, at least, had
no apparatus sufficiently sensitive to detect a beam of that nature.
We will therefore now get in touch with the Callistonians and with our
own people."
  *  *  *  *  *
Brandon seated himself before the communicator screen, and while the
others packed themselves closely around his stool, he snapped on the
visiray and turned the dials which directed that invisible, immensely
complex beam through space. The screen was apparently in itself a coign
of vantage, flying through space with the velocity of light, and the
watchers gasped involuntarily and drew themselves together, as with that
unthinkable speed they flashed down toward the surface of Callisto.
So realistic was the impression that they themselves were hurtling
through the void, that they could scarcely reason themselves into
believing their positive knowledge that the impending collision was
not an actual happening! Reducing the velocity of the projection
abruptly as it approached the satellite, Brandon flashed it down into
a crater indicated by Czuv, and along a tunnel to the city of Zbardk,
where the Callistonian captain held a long conversation with the Council
of the nation. Frowning in thought, he turned to Newton and spoke
seriously and slowly.
"Immediately after the loss of our super-plane, with the supposed death
of King, Breckenridge, and myself, the other Tellurian officers were
returned to Europa, since even they could be of no assistance to us
Callistonians in our struggle against the new, high-acceleration vessels
of the hexans. The present situation is much more serious than I would
have believed possible. The last vessel going to visit Wruszk, our city
upon Europa, was caught and destroyed by the hexans, and for many weeks
no ship or message has come from there to Callisto. In spite of the fact
that the hexan fleet is smaller than ever before, they are guarding
Europa very closely. It is feared that they may have found and destroyed
our city there--an expedition is even now about to set out in a
desperate attempt to learn the fate of our fellows."
"Suppose the rays of the lifeboats were detected in landing?" asked
Brandon. "That might have given them a clue."
"Possibly; but it is equally possible that our own men became careless
in the operation of one of our own vessels. Having been unmolested so
long, they might have relaxed their vigilance. We may never know."
"Tell 'em to cancel the expedition--we'll shoot the visiray over
there right now and find out all about it. We'll let them know pretty
quickly. Also, you might tell them that you've got complete plans and
specifications for all the weapons that the hexans have, and a couple
besides, and that the quicker they shoot a ship out here after you, the
sooner they can get to building some stuff to blow those hexans clear
out of space!"
It was the work of only a few moments to drive the visiray projection
to Europa, where Czuv, to the great relief of all, found that the hexans
had not yet discovered either Wruszk or the Terrestrial workings.
All Europan humanity, fully aware of the hexan investment, was
exerting every possible precaution against discovery by the enemy.
This information was duly flashed to the Council of Callisto, and the
projection was then hurled across the intervening reaches of space and
into the cavern in which was being built the enormous rocket-ship in
which the Terrestrial refugees were to attempt the long voyage back
to their own distant planet.
It took some little time to convince Doctor Penfield that there had
been projected into the empty air of his little sanctum an absolutely
invisible and impalpable structure of pure force capable of receiving
and transmitting voice and vision. Once convinced of the reality of the
phenomenon, however, the speaker beside Brandon's communicator screen
fairly rattled under the fervor of his greeting, so great was his
pleasure at the arrival of the expedition of relief and in knowing that
King and Breckenridge, whom they had, of course, given up for dead, were
aboard the Interplanetary vessel.
Penfield reported that the work upon the great rocket-ship was
progressing satisfactorily, although slowly, since it was so much larger
than any vessel theretofore constructed by the Callistonians. Newton,
in turn, informed the autocrat of the stranded Terrestrials as to the
_status quo_ of the rescuing party.
"Of course, because of the hexan blockade, you cannot take us off until
they have been wiped out, which will be several months at best," the
surgeon said, slowly, and a shadow came over his face as he spoke.
"Well, what can't be cured...."
"Trouble with the personnel?" King broke in sharply.
"Personnel, yes; but not trouble in the sense you mean--we have had
none of that. It is only that there are four more of us now than there
were...."
"Huh? How come?" demanded Brandon, in astonishment.
"Four babies have been born to us here so far, and several more are
coming. They are the ones I'm worried about. Most normal adults can
stand it here without any serious effects, but this thin atmosphere and
weak gravity are certain to result in abnormal development of children.
However, there may be another way out of it. Are you using normal
acceleration, or have you Martians aboard?"
"Both," replied Brandon. "We are carrying two inhabitants of Mars,
but Alcantro and Fedanzo are not ordinary Martians. They have been in
constant training ever since we left Tellus, and now they can stand as
high an acceleration as a weak Tellurian. We're riding at normal."
"Good! As you already know, there has been no communication of late
between here and Callisto. It had already been decided, however, that
one more voyage must be risked, in order to bring back material which
is most urgently needed. Since the vessel will leave here light and is
large enough to carry about thirty passengers on a short trip with some
crowding, the Council will probably approve of having it carry some of
our passengers out to the _Sirius_--especially now, since a vessel must
visit you, anyway, to get Captain Czuv and the specifications of the new
armament. All these things can be done with one vessel in one trip."
"That sounds fine!" boomed King. "It will give me a chance to get back
there where I belong, too. Whom are you sending out?"
"The seven couples who either have babies already or who will have them
in the next few months; and some of our young who aren't standing the
gaff any too well. You won't be in the red very deeply on the deal,
either--while two or three of the passengers I am sending you will
certainly be a nuisance; anybody could use, anywhere, such men as
Commander Sanderson and Lieut..."
"Sanderson!" interrupted King. "Why, he wasn't--when did _he_ get
married?"
"The day after we arrived here," replied the surgeon. "His fiancee was
aboard the _Arcturus_, and when they found out how long we would have
to be here, they very sensibly decided not to wait."
"Were there any others?" demanded Nadia, who, standing between Stevens
and her father, had been an interested listener.
"Plenty of them! Fourteen of our young women passengers have married
here upon Europa. A few married fellow-passengers, but most of them
picked out officers of the _Arcturus_. You'll find your staff made up
pretty largely of benedicts now, King! We've been here a year, you know,
and time will tell! Young Commander Sanderson's a fine baby--he'll be a
credit to the IPC some day, if we can get him aboard the _Sirius_, where
he can get a good start. We could give our babies normal air pressure
here by building special rooms, but we cannot give them the normal
acceleration necessary to develop their muscles properly."
"Well, we'd better snap over to Callisto and take this up with the
Council," Brandon put in. "I don't imagine that there will be any
objections, so you might as well get your ship gassed up and
loaded--we'll be back here with the okay in about a minute and a half."
  *  *  *  *  *
With Brandon at the controls and with Czuv at the communicator plate,
the projection flashed toward distant Callisto and the group melted
away, each man going about his interrupted task.
"Daddy, take us somewhere--I want to talk to you," Nadia spoke to her
father, and the director led her and Stevens to his own room.
"All x, daughter; out with it!" and he bent upon her a quizzical glance,
under which a fiery blush burned from her throat to her forehead.
"Dad, I've been thinking a lot since you rescued us, and what we've just
heard has given me the nerve to say it. Steve, of course, wouldn't dare
suggest such a thing until we're safely back on Earth, so I will." Her
deep brown eyes held his steadily. "All those girls got married--why,
some of them have babies already--and Steve and I have waited for each
other _so_ long, daddy! And _none_ of them love each other the way we
do. Do they, Steve?"
"I don't see how they could, sir; and that goes straight across the
panel," and he bore unflinchingly the piercing gaze of the older man
as his right arm encircled the girl and held her close.
"Well, why not?" A sudden smile transformed Newton's stern visage.
"There are three chaplains with the police--a Methodist minister,
a Catholic priest, and a Jewish rabbi. Also, we have on board two
full-fledged I-P captains, either of whom is authorized to tie
matrimonial knots. The means are not lacking--if you're both sure of
yourselves?" and all levity disappeared as he studied the two young
faces.
"Yes, you are sure," he continued after a moment "just as her mother and
I were--and are. It is too bad that she cannot be here with you, but it
may be a long time before we can return to Tellus, and you have indeed
waited long."
"Oh thanks, Daddy, you're just a perfectly wonderful old darling!" Nadia
exclaimed, as she threw her arms rapturously around his neck. "And this
isn't a warship at all--you know perfectly well that it's a research
laboratory, and that as soon as the Navy gets here, you won't let it
fight a bit more, because such scientists can't be allowed to risk
themselves! And also, you're forgetting that whole flock of women and
babies that are coming out here just as fast as they can get themselves
ready. So get going, daddy old dear, and let's do things! Steve's a
Quaker and we're Presbyterians, so none of the chaplains will do at all.
Besides, I promised Captain King ages ago that he could marry me, so go
get him and we'll do it now. Bill can be my bridesmaid, you'll give me
away, and Steve can have the other two of his Big Three for best men.
I'm off to hunt up the flimsiest, fussiest white dress I can find in my
trunks. Let's go!"
"Mr. Newton." Stevens spoke thoughtfully as Nadia darted away. "You said
something about her mother, I didn't want to say anything to raise false
hopes while she was here, but I've got an idea. Let's meet in Brandon's
room instead of here. We can send code to Tellus easily enough on our
ultrawave, and we may be able to fake up something on vision."
A few minutes later the Big Three were in Brandon's private study;
staring intently into a screen of ground glass upon which played
flickering, flashing lights, while the black-haired physicist
manipulated micrometer dials in infinitesimal arcs.
"Once more, Mac," Brandon directed. "Pretty nearly had them that time.
We're stretching this projector about six hundred percent, but we've got
to make this connection. Can't you give me just a little more voltage on
those secondaries?"
"I can _not_!" the voice of the first assistant snapped from the
speaker. "I'm overloading now so badly that some of my plates are
getting hot--if I hold this voltage much longer, the whole secondary
bank of tubes is going out. All x--you're on zero!"
"All x!" Flashing and waning, the lights upon the screen formed
fleeting, shifting, nebulous images of a relay station upon distant
Earth; but the utmost power of the transmitting fields could neither
steady the image nor hold it.
"Back off, Mac," Brandon instructed. "I'm afraid we can't hold 'em
direct--no use blowing a bank of tubes. We'll try relaying through
Mars--we can hold them there, I think. It will muss up reception some,
but it will probably be better than direct, at that. Point oh five three
six ... all x--shoot!"
Brandon's relay station upon Mars was finally raised and held, and
a corps of keenly interested engineers there made short work of the
Earth-Mars linkage. Soon the screen glowed with the picture of the
transmitter-room of the Terrestrial station, and while the three men
were waiting for Mrs. Newton to be called to her own television set,
the door behind them opened. Nadia and her escorts entered the room--but
Stevens' eyes saw only the entrancing vision of loveliness that was his
bride. Dressed in a clinging white gown of shimmering silk, her hair a
golden blond corona, sweetly curved lips slightly parted and wide eyes
eloquent, she paused momentarily as Stevens came to his feet and stared
at her, his very heart in his eyes.
"You never saw me in a dress before--do you like me, Steve?"
"_Like_ you! You're beautiful!" and gray eyes and brown, deep with
wonder and with love, met and held as, unheeding the presence of their
friends, they went into each other's arms in a coalescence as inevitable
and as final as Fate itself.
"Hi, Nadia old dear!" and "Daughter, from what I can see of my
son-in-law, I believe that he may do," came together from the speaker.
Nadia tore herself from Stevens' embrace, to see upon the lambent screen
the happily smiling faces of her mother and sister.
"Mother! Claire! Oh, you three wonder-workers!" She addressed
simultaneously the distant Terrestrials and the scientists at her side,
while broken exclamations, punctuated by ominous, crackling snaps, came
from the laboring amplifier.
"Sorry to interrupt," MacDonald's voice broke in, "but you'll have to
hurry it up. Alcantro and Fedanzo are doing their best, but every plate
in my secondary bank's red hot, and you could fry an egg on any one of
my transformers. Even my primary tubes are running hot. She won't hold
together five minutes longer!"
Captain King opened his book, and in that small steel room, unadorned
save for stack upon stack of bookcases, the brief but solemn ceremony
joining two young lives was read--its solemnity only intensified by its
unique accompaniment. For from Brandon at the primary controls, through
the power-room of the _Sirius_ and the relay-station upon Mars, to the
immense Interplanetary transmitter upon Earth, the greatest radio and
television engineers of two planets were fighting overdriven equipment,
trying to hold an almost impossible connection, in order that Nadia
Newton's mother and sister might be present at her wedding, hundreds of
millions of miles distant in space!
"I pronounce you man and wife. Whom God hath joined, let no man put
asunder." The sacred old ritual ended and Captain King picked up
the bride in his great arms as though she were a baby, kissed her
vigorously, and set her down in front of the transmitter. In the midst
of the joyous confusion that ensued a tearing, rattling crash came from
the speaker and the screen went blank.
"There!" lamented MacDonald from the power room. "I knew they'd blow!
There goes my whole secondary bank--eight perfectly good ten-nineteens
all shot to...."
"That's too bad, but it couldn't be helped; they went for a good cause,"
interrupted Brandon. "I'll come down and help clean up the mess."
  *  *  *  *  *
Leaving the bridal party, he made his way rapidly to the power room,
where he found MacDonald and the two Martians inspecting the smoking
remains of what had been the secondary bank of their powerful
ultra-transmitter. Spare parts in abundance were on hand, and it was
not long until the damaged section was apparently as good as new.
"Now to try her out," Brandon announced. "We want to give her a good
workout, but there's no use trying the I-P stations any more--they're
altogether too hard to handle at this range. Czuv said something about
an unknown race of monstrosities at the south pole of Jupiter--let's try
it on them for a while."
He flung the field of force out into space, as responsive to his will
as a well-trained horse, and guided it toward the southern limb of that
gigantic world. Down and down the projection plunged, through mile after
mile of reeking, steaming fog, impenetrable to earthly eyes. Finally it
came to rest upon the surface, hundreds of feet deep in a lush, dank,
tropical jungle, and Brandon plugged into the Venerian room.
"Kenor? We've got a lot of use for you, if you can come down here for a
while. Thanks a lot." He turned to the Martians. "Luckily, we've got a
couple of infra-red transformers aboard, so we won't have to build one.
You fellows might break one out and shunt it onto this circuit while Dol
Kenor is hunting up something for us to look at.
"Hi, old Infra-Eyes!" he went on, as the Venerian scientist waddled into
the room in his bulging space-suit. "We've got something here that's
right down your alley. Want to see what you can see?"
"Ah, a beautiful scene!" exclaimed Dol Kenor, after one glance into the
plate. "It is indeed a relief, after all this coldness and glare, to
see such a soft, warm landscape--even though I have never expected to
behold quite such a violent bit of jungle," and under his guidance the
projection flashed over hundreds of miles of territory. To the eyes of
the Terrestrials the screen revealed only a blank, amorphous grayness,
through which at times there shot lines and masses of vague and
meaningless form; but the Venerian was very evidently seeing and
enjoying many and diverse scenes.
"There, I think, is what you wish to see first," he announced, as he
finally steadied the controls, and Brandon cut in upon the shunting
screen the infra-red transformer. This device, developed long before to
render possible the use of Terrestrial eyes in the opaque atmosphere of
Venus, stepped up the fog-piercing long waves into the frequencies of
light capable of affecting the earthly retina. Instantly the dull gray
blank of the shunting screen became transformed into a clear and
colorful picture of the great city of the Jovians of the South.
"Great Cat!" Brandon exclaimed. "Flying fortresses is right! They're in
war formation, too, or I'm a polyp! We've got to watch this, Mac, all
of it, and watch it close--it's apt to have a big bearing on what we'll
have to do, before they get done. Better we rig up another set, and put
a relay of observers on this job!"
CHAPTER XI
The Vorkul-Hexan War
Vorkulia, the city of the Vorkuls, was an immense seven-pointed
star. At its center, directly upon the south pole of Jupiter, rose a
tremendous shaft--its cross-section likewise a tapering seven-pointed
star--which housed the directing intelligence of the nation. Radiating
from the seven cardinal points of the building were short lanes leading
to star-shaped open plots, from which in turn branched out ways to other
stellate areas; ways reaching, after many such steps, to the towering
inner walls of the metropolis. The outer walls, still loftier and even
more massive ramparts of sullen gray-green metal, formed a seamless,
jointless barrier against an utterly indescribable foe; a barrier whose
outer faces radiated constantly a searing, coruscating green emanation.
Metal alone could not long have barred that voracious and implacably
relentless enemy, but against that lethal green emanation even that
ravening Jovian jungle could not prevail, but fell back, impotent.
Writhing and crawling, loathesomely palpitant with an unspeakable
exuberance of foul and repellent vigor, possible only to such
meteorological conditions as obtained there, it threw its most
hideously prolific growths against that radiant wall in vain.
The short, zig-zag lanes, the ways, and the seven-pointed areas
were paved with a greenish glass. This pavement was intended solely
to prevent vegetable growth and carried no traffic whatever, since few
indeed of the Vorkuls have ever been earth-bound and all traffic was in
the air. The principal purpose of the openings was to separate, and
thus to render accessible by air, the mighty buildings which, level
upon level, towered upward, with airships hovering at or anchored to
doorways and entrances at every level. Buildings, entrances, everything
visible--all replicated, reiterated, repeated infinite variations in
the one theme, that of the septenate stelliform.
Color ran riot; masses varied from immense blocks of awe-inspiring
grandeur to delicate tracery of sheerest gossamer; lights flamed and
flared in wide bands and in narrow, flashing pencils--but in all,
through all, over all, and dominating all was the Seven-Pointed Star.
In and almost filling the space, at least a mile in width,
between the inner and the outer walls were huge, seven-sided
structures--featureless, squat, forbidding heptagons of dull green
metal. No thing living was to be seen in that space. Its pavement was
of solid metal and immensely thick, and that metal, as well as that of
the walls, was burned and blackened and seared as though by numberless
exposures to intolerable flame. In a lower compartment of one of these
enormous heptagons Vortel Kromodeor, First Projector Officer, rested
before a gigantic and complex instrument board. He was at ease--his huge
wings folded, his sinuous length coiled comfortably in slack loops about
two horizontal bars. But at least one enormous, extensible eye was
always pointed toward the board, always was at least one nimble and
bat-like ear cocked attentively in the direction of the signal panel.
A whistling, shrieking ululation rent the air and the officer's coils
tightened as he reared a few feet of his length upright, shooting out
half a dozen tentacular arms to various switches and controls upon his
board, while throughout the great heptagon, hundreds of other Vorkuls
sprang to attention at their assigned posts of duty. As the howling wail
came to a climax in a blast of sound Kromodeor threw over a lever, as
did every other projector officer in every other heptagon, and there was
made plain to any observer the reason for the burns and scars in the
tortured space between the lofty inner and outer walls of Vorkulia.
For these heptagons were the monstrous flying fortresses which Czuv
had occasionally seen from afar, as they went upon some unusual errand
above the Jovian banks of mist, and which Brandon was soon to see in
his visiray screen. The seared and disfigured metal of the pavement
and walls was made so by the release of the furious blasts of energy
necessary to raise those untold thousands of tons of mass against the
attraction of Jupiter, more than two and a half times the gravity of our
own world! Vast volumes of flaming energy shrieked from the ports. Wave
upon wave, flooding the heptagons, it dashed back and forth upon the
heavy metal between the walls. As more and more of the inconceivable
power of those Titanic generators was unleashed, it boiled forth in
a devastating flood which, striking the walls, rebounded and leaped
vertically far above even those mighty ramparts. Even the enormous
thickness of the highly conducting metal could not absorb all the
energy of that intolerable blast, and immediately beneath the ports new
seven-pointed areas of disfigurement appeared as those terrific flying
fortresses were finally wrenched from the ground and hurled upward.
  *  *  *  *  *
High in the air, another signal wailed up and down a peculiar scale of
sound and the mighty host of vessels formed smoothly into symmetrical
groups of seven. Each group then moved with mathematical precision into
its allotted position in a complex geometrical formation--a gigantic,
seven-ribbed, duplex cone in space. The flagship flew at the apex of
this stupendous formation; behind, and protected by, the full power
of the other floating citadels of the forty-nine groups of seven.
Due north, the amazing armada sped in rigorous alignment, flying along
a predetermined meridian--due north!
At the end of his watch Kromodeor relinquished his board to the officer
relieving him and shot into the air, propelled by the straightening of
the powerful coils of his snake-like body and tail. Wings half spread,
lateral and vertical ruddering fins outthrust, he soared across the room
toward a low opening. Just before they struck the wall upon either side
of the doorway the great wings snapped shut, the fins retracted, and the
long and heavy body struck the floor of the passage without a jar. With
a wriggling, serpentine motion he sped like a vibrant arrow along the
hall and into a wardroom. There, after a brief glance around the room,
he coiled up beside a fellow officer who, with one eye, was negligently
reading a scroll held in three or four hands; while with another eye,
poised upon its slender pedicle, he watched a moving picture upon a
television screen.
"Hello, Kromodeor," Wixill, Chief Power Officer[2] greeted the newcomer
in the wailing, hissing language of the Vorkuls. He tossed the scroll
into the air, where it instantly rolled into a tight cylinder and shot
into an opening in the wall of the room. "Glad to see you. Books and
shows are all right on practice cruises, but I can't seem to work up
much enthusiasm about such things now."
[Footnote 2: In order to avoid all unnecessary strain upon the memory of
the reader, all titles, etc., have been given in the closest possible
English equivalent, instead of in an attempted transliteration of the
foreign word. This particular officer has no counterpart upon Tellurian
vessels. He is the second in command of a Vorkulian fortress, his
function being to supervise all expenditure of power.--E. E. S.]
Kromodeor elevated an eye and studied the screen, upon which, to the
accompaniment of whistling, shrieking sound, whirled and gyrated an
interlacing group of serpentine forms.
"A good show, Wixill," the projector officer replied, "but nothing to
hold the attention of men engaged in what we are doing. Think of it!
After twenty years of preparation--two long lifetimes--and for the first
time in our history, we are actually going to war!"
"I have thought of it at length. It is disgusting. Compelled to traffic
with an alien form of life! Were it not to end in the extinction of
those unspeakable hexans, it would be futile to the point of silliness.
I cannot understand them at all. There is ample room upon this planet
for all of us. Our races combined are not using one seven-thousandth
of its surface. You would think that they would shun all strangers.
Yet for ages have they attacked us, refusing to let us alone, until
finally they forced us to prepare means for their destruction. They
seem as senselessly savage as the jungle growths, and, but for their
very evident intelligence, one would class them as such. You would
think that, being intelligent and being alien to us, they would not
have anything to do with us in any way, peacefully or otherwise.
However, their intrusions and depredations are about to end."
"They certainly are. Vorkulia has endured much--too much--but I am glad
that our forefathers did not decide to exterminate them sooner. If they
had, we could not have been doing this now."
"There speaks the rashness of youth, Kromodeor. It is a violation of all
our instincts to have any commerce with outsiders, as you will learn as
soon as you see one of them. Then, too, we will lose heavily. Since we
have studied their armaments so long, and have subjected every phase of
the situation to statistical analysis, it is certain that we are to
succeed--but you also know at what cost."
"Two-sevenths of our force, with a probable error of one in seven,"
replied the younger Vorkul. "And because that figure cannot be improved
within the next seven years and because of the exceptional weakness of
the hexans due to their unexpectedly great losses upon Callisto, we are
attacking at this time. Their spherical vessels are nothing, of course.
It is in the reduction of the city that we will lose men and vessels.
But at that, each of us has five chances in seven of returning, which is
good enough odds--much better than we had in that last expedition into
the jungle. But by the Mighty Seven, I shall make myself wrap around one
hexan, for my brother's sake," and his coils tightened unconsciously.
"Hideous, repulsive monstrosities! Creatures so horrible should not
be allowed to live--they should have been tossed over the wall to
the jungle ages ago!" Kromodeor curled out an eye as he spoke, and
complacently surveyed the writhing cylinder of sinuous, supple power
that was his own body.
"Better avoid contact work with them if possible," cautioned Wixill.
"You might not be able to unwrap, and to touch one of them is almost
unthinkable. Speaking of wrapping, you know that they are putting on the
finals of the contact work in the star this evening. Let's watch them."
They slid to the floor and wriggled away in perfect "step"--undulating
along in such nice synchronism that their adjacent sides, only a few
inches apart, formed two waving rigidly parallel lines. Deep in the
lower part of the fortress they entered a large assembly room, provided
with a raised platform in the center and having hundreds of short,
upright posts in lieu of chairs; most of which were already taken by
spectators. The two officers curled their tails comfortably around two
of the vacant pillars, elevated their heads to a convenient level of
sight and directed each an eye or two upon the stage. This was, of
course, heptagonal. Its sides, like those of the mighty flying forts
themselves, were not straight, but angled inward sufficiently to make
the platform a seven-pointed star. The edge was outlined by a low rail,
and bulwark and floor were padded with thick layers of a hard but smooth
and yielding fabric.
  *  *  *  *  *
In this star-shaped ring two young Vorkuls were contending for the
championship of the fleet in a contest that seemed to combine most of
the features of wrestling, boxing, and bar-room brawling, with no holds
barred. Four hands of each of the creatures held heavy leather billies,
and could be used only in striking with those weapons, the remaining
hands being left free to employ as the owner saw fit. Since the sport
was not intended to be lethal, however, the eyes and other highly
vulnerable parts were protected by metal masks, and the wing ribs
were similarly guarded by leathern shields. The guiding fins, being
comparatively small and extremely tough, required no protection.
"We're just in time," Kromodeor whistled. "The main bout is nicely on.
See anyone from the flagship? I might stake a couple of korpels that
Sintris will paint the symbol upon his wing."
"Most of their men seem to be across the star," Wixill replied, and both
beings fell silent, absorbed in the struggle going on in the ring.
It was a contest well worth watching. Wing crashed against mighty wing
and the lithe, hard bodies snapped and curled this way and that, almost
faster than the eye could follow, in quest of advantageous holds. Above
the shrieking wails of the crowd could be heard the smacks and thuds of
the eight flying clubs as they struck against the leather shields or
against tough and scaly hides. For minutes the conflict raged, with no
advantage apparent. Now the fighters were flat upon the floor of the
star, now dozens of feet in the air above it, as one or the other sought
to gain a height from which to plunge downward upon his opponent; but
both stayed upon or over the star--to leave its boundaries was to lose
disgracefully.
Then, high in air, the visiting warrior thought that he saw an opening
and grappled. Wings crashed in fierce blows, hands gripped and furiously
wrenched. Two powerful bodies, tapering smoothly down to equally
powerful tails, corkscrewed around each other viciously, winding up into
something resembling tightly twisted lamp cord; and the two Vorkuls,
each helpless, fell to the mat with a crash. Fast as was Zerexi, the
gladiator from the flagship, Sintris was the merest trifle faster.
Like the straightening of a twisted spring of tempered steel that long
body uncoiled as they struck the floor, and up under those shielding
wings--an infinitesimal fraction of a second slow in interposing--that
lithe tail sped. Two lightning loops flashed around the neck of the
visitor and tightened inexorably. Desperately the victim fought to break
that terrible strangle hold, but every maneuver was countered as soon
as it was begun. Beating wings, under whose frightful blows the very air
quivered, were met and parried by wings equally capable. Hands and clubs
were of no avail against that corded cable of sinew, and Sintris, his
head retracted between his wings and his own hands reenforcing that
impregnable covering over his head and neck, threw all his power into
his tail--tightening, with terrific, rippling surges, that already
throttling band about the throat of his opponent. Only one result was
possible. Soon Zerexi lay quiet, and a violet beam of light flared from
a torch at the ringside, bathing both contenders. At the flash the
winner disengaged himself from the loser, and stood by until the latter
had recovered the use of his paralyzed muscles. The two combatants then
touched wing tips in salute and flew away together, over the heads of
the crowd; plunging into a doorway and disappearing as the two officers
uncoiled from their "seats" and wriggled out into the corridor.
"Fine piece of contact work," said Wixill, thoughtfully. "I'm glad that
Sintris won, but I did not expect him to win so easily. Zerexi shouldn't
have gone into a knot so early against such a fast man."
"Oh, I don't know," argued Kromodeor. "His big mistake was in that
second body check. If he had blocked the sixth arm with his fifth, taken
out the fourth and second with his third, and then gone in with...." and
so, quite like two early experts after a good boxing match, the friends
argued the fine points of the contest long after they had reached their
quarters.
Day after day the vast duplex cone of Vorkulian fortresses sped
toward the north pole of the great planet, with a high and constant
velocity. Day after day the complex geometrical figure in space remained
unchanged, no unit deviating measurably from its precise place in the
formation. Over rapacious jungles, over geysers spouting hot water,
over sullenly steaming rivers and seas, over boiling lakes of mud, and
high over gigantic volcanoes, in uninterrupted eruptions of cataclysmic
violence, the Vorkulian phalanx flew--straight north. The equatorial
regions, considerably hotter than the poles, were traversed with
practically no change in scenery--it was a world of steaming fog,
of jungle, of hot water, of boiling, spurting mud, and of volcanoes.
Not of such mild and sporadic volcanic outbreaks as we of green Terra
know, but of gigantic primordial volcanoes, in terrifyingly continuous
performances of frightful intensity. Due north the Vorkulian spearhead
was hurled, before the rigorous geometrical alignment was altered.
"All captains, attention!" Finally, in a high latitude, the flagship
sent out final instructions. "The hexans have detected us and our long
range observers report that they are coming to meet us in force. We will
now go into the whirl, and proceed with the maneuvers exactly as they
have been planned. Whirl!"
At the command, each vessel began to pursue a tortuous spiral path.
Each group of seven circled slowly about its own axis, as though each
structure were attached rigidly to a radius rod, and at the same time
spiraled around the line of advance in such fashion that the whole
gigantic cone, wide open maw to the fore, seemed to be boring its way
through the air.
"Lucky again!" Kromodeor, in the wardroom, turned to Wixill as the two
prepared to take their respective watches. "It looks as though the first
action would come while we're on duty. I've got just one favor to ask,
if you have to economize on power, let Number One alone, will you?"
"No fear of that," Wixill hissed, with the Vorkulian equivalent of a
chuckle. "We have abundance of power for all of your projector officers.
But don't waste any of it, or I'll cut you down five ratings!"
"You're welcome. When I shine old Number One on any hexan work, one
flash is all we'll take. See you at supper," and, leaving his superior
at the door of the power room, Kromodeor wriggled away to his station
upon the parallel horizontal bars before his panel.
Making sure that his tail coils were so firmly clamped that no possible
lurch or shock could throw him out of position, he set an eye toward
each of his sighting screens, even though he knew that it would be long
before those comparatively short range instruments would show anything
except friendly vessels. Then, ready for any emergency, he scanned his
one "live" screen--the one upon which were being flashed the pictures
and reports secured by the high-powered instruments of the observers.
  *  *  *  *  *
With the terrific acceleration employed by the hexan spheres, it
was not long until the leading squadron of fighting globes neared
the Vorkulian war-cone. This advance guard was composed of the new,
high-acceleration vessels. Their crews, with the innate blood-lust
and savagery of their breed, had not even entertained the thought of
accommodating their swifter pace to that of the main body of the fleet.
These vast, slow-moving structures were no more to be feared than those
similar ones whose visits they had been repulsing for twenty long
Jovian years--by the time the slower spheres could arrive upon the scene
there would be nothing left for them to do. Therefore, few in number
as were the vessels of the vanguard, they rushed to the attack. In one
blinding salvo they launched their supposedly irresistible planes of
force--dazzling, scintillating planes under whose fierce power the
studying, questing, scouting fortresses previously encountered had fled
back southward; cut, beaten, and crippled. These spiraling monsters,
however, did not pause or waver in their stolidly ordered motion.
As the hexan planes of force flashed out, the dull green metal walls
broke into a sparkling green radiance, against which the Titanic
bolts spent themselves in vain. Then there leaped out from the weird
brilliance of the walls of the fortresses great shafts of pale green
luminescence--tractor ray after gigantic tractor ray, which seized
upon the hexan spheres and drew them ruthlessly into the yawning
open end of that gigantic cone.
Then, in each group of seven, similar great streamers of energy reached
out from fortress to fortress, until each group was welded into one
mighty unit by twenty-one such bands of force. The unit formed, a ray
from each of its seven component structures seized upon a designated
sphere, and under the combined power of those seven tractors, the
luckless globe was literally snapped into the center of mass of the
Vorkulian unit. There seven dully gleaming red pressor rays leaped upon
it, backed by all the power of seven gigantic fortresses, held rigidly
in formation by the unimaginable mass of the structures and by their
twenty-one prodigious tractor beams. Under that awful impact, the
screens and walls of the hexan spheres were exactly as effective as so
many structures of the most tenuous vapor. The red glare of the vortex
of those beams was lightened momentarily by a flash of brighter color,
and through the foggy atmosphere there may have flamed briefly a drop or
two of metal that was only liquefied. The red and green beams snapped
out, the peculiar radiance died from the metal walls, and the gigantic
duplex cone of the Vorkuls bored serenely northward--as little marked or
affected by the episode as is a darting swift who, having snapped up a
chance insect in full flight, darts on.
"Great Cat!" Far off in space, Brandon turned from his visiray screen
and wiped his brow. "Czuv certainly chirped it, Perce, when he called
those things flying fortresses. But who, what, why, and how? We didn't
see any apparatus that looked capable of generating or handling those
beams--and of course, when they got started, their screens cut us
off at the pockets. Wish we could have made some sense out of their
language--like to know a few of their ideas--find out whether we can't
get on terms with them some way or other. Funny-looking wampuses, but
they've got real brains--their think-tanks are very evidently full of
bubbles. If they have it in mind to take us on next, old son, it'll be
just ... too ... bad!"
"And then some," agreed Stevens. "They've got something--no fooling. It
looks like the hexans are going to get theirs, good and plenty, pretty
soon--and then what? I'd give my left lung and four front teeth for one
long look at their controls in action."
"You and me both--it's funny, the way those green ray-screens stick to
the walls, instead of being spherical, as you'd expect ... should think
they'd _have_ to radiate from a center, and so be spherical," Brandon
cogitated. "However, we've got nothing corkscrewy enough to go through
them, so we'll have to stand by. We'll stay inside whenever possible,
look on from outside when we must, but all the time picking up whatever
information we can. In the meantime, now that we've got our passengers,
old Doctor Westfall prescribes something that he says is good for what
ails us. Distance--lots of distance, straight out from the sun--and
I wouldn't wonder if we'd better take his prescription."
The two Terrestrial observers relapsed into silence, staring into
their visiray plates, searching throughout the enormous volume of one
of those great fortresses in another attempt to solve the mystery of the
generation and propagation of the incredible manifestations of energy
which they had just witnessed. Scarcely had the search begun, however,
when the visirays were again cut off sharply--the rapidly advancing main
fleet of the hexans had arrived and the scintillant Vorkulian screens
were again in place.
True to hexan nature, training and tradition, the fleet, hundreds
strong, rushed savagely to the attack. Above, below, and around the
far-flung cone the furious globes dashed, attacking every Vorkulian
craft viciously with every resource at their command; with every weapon
known to their diabolically destructive race. Planes of force stabbed
and slashed, concentrated beams of annihilation flared fiercely through
the reeking atmosphere, gigantic aerial bombs and torpedoes were hurled
with full radio control against the unwelcome visitor--with no effect.
Bound together in groups of seven by the mighty, pale-green bands of
force, the Vorkulian units sailed calmly northward, spiraling along with
not the slightest change in formation or velocity. The frightful planes
and beams of immeasurable power simply spent themselves harmlessly
against those sparklingly radiant green walls--seemingly as absorbent
to energy as a sponge is to water, since the eye could not detect any
change in the appearance of the screens, under even the fiercest blasts
of the hexan projectors. Bombs, torpedoes, and all material projectiles
were equally futile--they exploded harmlessly in the air far from their
objectives, or disappeared at the touch of one of those dark, dull-red
pressor rays. And swiftly, but calmly and methodically as at a Vorkulian
practice drill, the heptagons were destroying the hexan fleet. Seven
mighty green tractors would lash out, seize an attacking sphere, and
snap it into the center of mass of the unit of seven. There would be a
brief flash of dull red, a still briefer flare of incandescence, and the
impalpable magnets would leap out to seize another of the doomed globes.
It was only a matter of moments until not a hexan vessel remained; and
the Vorkulian juggernaut spiraled onward, now at full acceleration,
toward the hexan stronghold dimly visible far ahead of them--a vast
city built around Jupiter's northern pole.
At the controls of his projector, Kromodeor spun a dial with a
many-fingered, flexible hand and spoke.
"Wixill, I am being watched again--I can feel very plainly that strange
intelligence watching everything I do. Have the tracers located him?"
"No, they haven't been able to synchronize with his wave yet. Either
he is using a most minute pencil or, what is more probable, he is on a
frequency which we do not ordinarily use. However, I agree with you that
it is not a malignant intelligence. All of us have felt it, and none of
us senses enmity. Therefore, it is not a hexan--it may be one of those
strange creatures of the satellites, who are, of course, perfectly
harmless."
"Harmless, but unpleasant," returned Kromodeor. "When we get back I'm
going to find his beam myself and send a discharge along it that will
end his spying upon me. I do not...."
  *  *  *  *  *
A wailing signal interrupted the conversation and every Vorkul in
the vast fleet coiled even more tightly about his bars, for the real
battle was about to begin. The city of the hexans lay before them,
all her gigantic forces mustered to repel the first real invasion of
her long and warlike history. Mile after mile it extended, an orderly
labyrinth of spherical buildings arranged in vast interlocking series
of concentric circles--a city of such size that only a small part of it
was visible, even to the infra-red vision of the Vorkulians. Apparently
the city was unprotected, having not even a wall. Outward from the low,
rounded houses of the city's edge there reached a wide and verdant
plain, which was separated from the jungle by a narrow moat of
shimmering liquid--a liquid of such dire potency that across it,
even those frightful growths could neither leap nor creep.
But as the Vorkulian phalanx approached--now shooting forward and
upward with maximum acceleration, screaming bolts of energy flaming out
for miles behind each heptagon as the full power of its generators was
unleashed--it was made clear that the homeland of the hexans was far
from unprotected. The verdant plain disappeared in a blast of radiance,
revealing a transparent surface, through which could be seen masses of
machinery filling level below level, deep into the ground as far as the
eye could reach; and from the bright liquid of the girdling moat there
shot vertically upward a coruscantly refulgent band of intense yellow
luminescence. These were the hexan defences, heretofore invulnerable and
invincible. Against them any ordinary warcraft, equipped with ordinary
weapons of offense, would have been as pitifully impotent as a naked
baby attacking a battleship. But now those defenses were being
challenged by no ordinary craft; it had taken the mightiest intellects
of Vorkulia two long lifetimes to evolve the awful engine of destruction
which was hurling itself forward and upward with an already terrific and
constantly increasing speed.
Onward and upward flashed the gigantic duplex cone, its entire whirling
mass laced and latticed together--into one mammoth unit by green tractor
beams and red pressors. These tension and compression members, of
unheard-of power, made of the whole fleet of three hundred forty-three
fortresses a single stupendous structure--a structure with all the
strength and symmetry of a cantilever truss! Straight through that wall
of yellow vibrations the vast truss drove, green walls flaming blue
defiance as the absorbers overloaded; its doubly braced tip rearing
upward, into and beyond the vertical as it shot through that searing
yellow wall. Simultaneously from each heptagon there flamed downward a
green shaft of radiance, so that the whole immense circle of the cone's
mouth was one solid tractor beam, fastening upon and holding in an
unbreakable grip mile upon mile of the hexan earthworks.
Practically irresistible force and supposedly immovable object!
Every loose article in every heptagon had long since been stored in
its individual shockproof compartment, and now every Vorkul coiled his
entire body in fierce clasp about mighty horizontal bars: for the entire
kinetic energy of the untold millions of tons of mass comprising the
cone, at the terrific measure of its highest possible velocity, was
to be hurled upon those unbreakable linkages of force which bound
the trussed aggregation of Vorkulian fortresses to the deeply buried
intrenchments of the hexans. The gigantic composite tractor beam snapped
on and held. Inconceivably powerful as that beam was, it stretched a
trifle under the incomprehensible momentum of those prodigious masses
of metal, almost halted in their terrific flight. But the war-cone was
not quite halted; the calculations of the Vorkulian scientists had been
accurate. No possible artificial structure, and but few natural ones--in
practice maneuvers entire mountains had been lifted and hurled for miles
through the air--could have withstood the incredible violence of that
lunging, twisting, upheaving impact. Lifted bodily by that impalpable
hawser of force and cruelly wrenched and twisted by its enormous couple
of angular momentum, the hexan works came up out of the ground as a
waterpipe comes up in the teeth of a power shovel. The ground trembled
and rocked and boulders, fragments of concrete masonry, and masses of
metal flew in all directions as that city-encircling conduit of
diabolical machinery was torn from its bed.
  *  *  *  *  *
A portion of that conduit fully thirty miles in length was in the air,
a twisted, flaming inferno of wrecked generators, exploding ammunition,
and broken and short-circuited high-tension leads before the hexans
could themselves cut it and thus save the remainder of their
fortifications. With resounding crashes, the structure parted at the
weakened points, the furious upheaval stopped and, the tractor beams
shut off, the shattered, smoking, erupting mass of wreckage fell in
clashing, grinding ruin upon the city.
The enormous duplex cone of the Vorkuls did not attempt to repeat the
maneuver, but divided into two single cones, one of which darted toward
each point of rupture. There, upon the broken and unprotected ends of
the hexan cordon, their points of attack lay: theirs the task to eat
along that annular fortress, no matter what the opposition might bring
to bear--to channel in its place a furrow of devastation until the two
cones, their work complete, should meet at the opposite edge of the
city. Then what was left of the cones would separate into individual
heptagons, which would so systematically blast every hexan thing into
nothingness as to make certain that never again would they resume their
insensate attacks upon the Vorkuls. Having counted the cost and being
grimly ready to pay it, the implacable attackers hurled themselves upon
their objectives.
Here were no feeble spheres of space, commanding only the limited
energies transmitted to their small receptors through the ether. Instead
there were all the offensive and defensive weapons developed by hundreds
of generations of warrior-scientists; wielding all the incalculable
power capable of being produced by the massed generators of a mighty
nation. But for the breach opened in the circle by the irresistible
surprise attack, they would have been invulnerable, and, hampered as
they were by the defenseless ends of what should have been an endless
ring, the hexans took heavy toll.
The heptagons, massive and solidly braced as they were, and anchored by
tractor rays as well, shuddered and trembled throughout their mighty
frames under the impact of fiercely driven pressor beams. Sullenly
radiant green wall-screens flared brighter and brighter as the Vorkulian
absorbers and dissipators, mighty as they were, continued more and more
to overload; for there were being directed against them beams from the
entire remaining circumference of the stronghold. Every deadly frequency
and emanation known to the fiendish hexan intellect, backed by the full
power of the city, was poured out against the invaders in sizzling
shrieking bars, bands, and planes of frenzied incandescence. Nor was
vibratory destruction alone. Armor-piercing projectiles of enormous
size and weight were hurled--diamond-hard, drill-headed projectiles
which clung and bored upon impact. High-explosive shells, canisters of
gas, and the frightful aerial bombs and radio-dirigible torpedoes of
highly scientific war--all were thrown with lavish hand, as fast as
the projectors could be served. But thrust for thrust, ray for ray,
projectile for massive projectile, the Brobdingnagian creations of
the Vorkuls gave back to the hexans.
The material lining of the ghastly moat was the only substance capable
of resisting the action of its contents, and now, that lining destroyed
by the uprooting of the fortress, that corrosive, brilliantly mobile
liquid cascaded down in to the trough and added its hellish contribution
to the furious scene. For whatever that devouring fluid touched flared
into yellow flame, gave off clouds of lurid, strangling vapor, and
disappeared. But through yellow haze, through blasting frequencies,
through clouds of poisonous gas, through rain of metal and through
storm of explosive the two cones ground implacably onward, their every
offensive weapon centered upon the fast-receding exposed ends of the
hexan fortress. Their bombs and torpedoes ripped and tore into the
structure beneath the invulnerable shield and exploded, demolishing
and hurling aside like straws, the walls, projectors, hexads and vast
mountains of earth. Their terrible rays bored in, softening, fusing,
volatilizing metal, short-circuiting connections, destroying life
far ahead of the point of attack; and, drawn along by the relentlessly
creeping composite tractor beam, there progressed around the circumference
of the hexan city two veritable Saturnalia of destruction--uninterrupted,
cataclysmic detonations of sound and sizzling, shrieking, multi-colored
displays of pyrotechnic incandescence combining to form a spectacle
of violence incredible.
But the heptagons could not absorb nor radiate indefinitely those
torrents of energy, and soon one greenishly incandescent screen went
down. Giant shells pierced the green metal walls, giant beams of force
fused and consumed them. Faster and faster the huge heptagon became a
shapeless, flowing mass, its metal dripping away in flaming gouts of
brilliance; then it disappeared utterly in one terrific blast as some
probing enemy ray reached a vital part. The cone did not pause nor
waver. Many of its component units would go down, but it would go
on--and on and on until every hexan trace had disappeared or until
the last Vorkulian heptagon had been annihilated.
In one of the lowermost heptagons, one bearing the full brunt of the
hexan armament, Kromodeor reared upright as his projector controls
went dead beneath his hands. Finding his communicator screens likewise
lifeless, he slipped to the floor and wriggled to the room of the Chief
Power Officer, where he found Wixill idly fingering his controls.
"Are we out?" asked Kromodeor, tersely.
"All done," the Chief Power Officer calmly replied. "We have power left,
but we cannot use it, as they have crushed our screens and are fusing
our outer walls. Two out of seven chances, and we drew one of them. We
are still working on the infra band, over across on the Second's board,
but we won't last long...."
  *  *  *  *  *
As he spoke, the mighty fabric lurched under them, and only their quick
and powerful tails, darting in lightning loops about the bars, saved
them from being battered to death against the walls as the heptagon was
hurled end over end by a stupendous force. With a splintering crash it
came to rest upon the ground.
"I wonder how that happened? They should have rayed us out or exploded
us," Kromodeor pondered. The Vorkuls, with their inhumanly powerful,
sinuous bodies, were scarcely affected by the shock of that frightful
fall.
"They must have had a whole battery of pressors on us when our greens
went out--they threw us half-way across the city, almost into the gate
we made first," Wixill replied, studying the situation of the vessel in
the one small screen still in action. "We aren't hurt very badly--only a
few holes that they are starting to weld already. When the absorber and
dissipator crews get them cooled down enough so that we can use power
again, we'll go back."
But they were not to resume their place in the attack. Through the
holes in the still-glowing walls, hexan soldiery were leaping in
steady streams, fighting with the utmost savagery of their bloodthirsty
natures, urged on by the desperation born of the knowledge of imminent
defeat and total destruction. Hand-weapons roared, flashed, and
sparkled; heavy bars crashed and thudded against crunching bones;
mighty bodies and tails whipped crushingly about six-limbed forms which
wrenched and tore with monstrously powerful hands and claws. Fiercely
and valiantly the Vorkuls fought, but they were outnumbered by hundreds
and only one outcome was possible.
Kromodeor was one of the last to go down. Weapons long since exhausted,
he unwrapped his deadly coils from about a dead hexan and darted toward
a storeroom, only to be cut off by a horde of enemies. Throwing himself
down a vertical shaft, he flew toward a tiny projector-locker, in the
lowermost part of one of the great star's points, the hexans in hot
pursuit. He wrenched the door open, and even while searing planes of
force were riddling his body, he trained the frightful weapon he had
sought. He pressed the contact, and bursts of intolerable flame swept
the entire passage clear of life. Weakly he struggled to go out into the
aisle, but his muscles refused to do the bidding of his will and he lay
there, twitching feebly.
In the power room of the heptagon a hexan officer turned fiercely to
another, who was offering advice.
"Vorkuls? Bah!" he snarled, viciously. "Our race is finished. Die we
must, but we shall take with us the one enemy, who above all others
needs destruction!" and he hurled the captured Vorkulian fortress into
the air.
As the heptagon lurched upward, the massive door of a lower projector
locker clanged shut and Kromodeor collapsed in a corner, his
consciousness blotted out.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Well, that certainly tears it! That's a ... I...." Stevens' ready
vocabulary failed him and he turned to Brandon, who was still staring
narrow-eyed into the plate, watching the destruction of the hexan city.
"They've got something, all right--you've got to hand it to them,"
Brandon replied. "And we thought we knew something about forces and
physical phenomena in general. Those birds have forgotten more than we
ever will know. Just one of those things could take the whole I-P fleet,
armed as we are now, any morning before breakfast, just for setting-up
exercises. We've got to do something about it--but what?"
"It's okay--whatever you say. There may be an out somewhere, but I don't
see it," and Stevens' gloomy tone matched his words.
Highly trained scientists both, they had been watching that which
transcended all the science of the inner planets and knew themselves
outclassed immeasurably.
"Only one thing to do, as I see it," Brandon cogitated. "That's to keep
on going straight out, the way we're headed now. We'd better call a
council of war, to dope out a line of action."
CHAPTER XII
The Citadel in Space
For the first time in many days Brandon and Westfall sat at dinner in
the main dining room of the _Sirius_. They were enjoying greatly the
unaccustomed pleasure of a leisurely, formal meal; but still their
talk concerned the projection of pure forces instead of subjects more
appropriate to the table; still their eyes paid more attention to
diagrams drawn upon scraps of paper than to the diners about them.
"But I tell you, Quince, you're full of little red ants, clear to the
neck!" Brandon snorted, as Westfall waved one of his arguments aside.
"You must have had help to get that far off--no one man could possibly
be as wrong as you are. Why, those fields absolutely will...."
"Hi, Quincy! Hi, Norman!" a merry voice interrupted. "Still fighting as
usual, I see! What kind of knights are you, anyway, to rescue us poor
damsels in distress, and then never even know that we're alive?" A tall,
willowy brunette had seen the two physicists as she entered the saloon,
and came over to their table, a hand outstretched to each in cordial
greeting.
"Ho, Verna!" both men exclaimed, and came to their feet as they welcomed
the smiling, graceful newcomer.
"Sit down here, Verna--we have hardly started," Westfall invited, and
Brandon looked at the girl in assumed surprise as she seated herself in
the proffered chair.
"Well, Verna, it's like this...." he began.
"That's enough!" she broke in. "That phrase always was your introduction
to one of the world's greatest brainstorms. But I know that this is the
first time you have had time even to eat like civilized beings, so I'll
forgive you this once. Why all the registering of amazement, Norman?"
"I'm astonished that you aren't being monopolized by some husband or
other. Surely the officers of the _Arcturus_ weren't so dumb that they'd
stand for your still being Verna _Pickering_, were they?"
"Not dumb, Norman, no. Far from it. But I'm still working for my
M. R. S. degree, and I haven't succeeded in snaring it yet. You'd be
surprised at how cagy those officers got after a few of them had been
captured. But they are just like any other hunted game, I suppose--the
antelopes that survive get pretty wild, you know," she concluded,
plaintively.
"Well, that certainly is one tough break for a poor little girl,"
Brandon sympathized. "Quince, our little Nell, here, hasn't been done
right by. I'm bashful and you're a woman-hater, but between us, some
way, we've simply got to take steps."
"You might take longer steps than you think," Verna laughed, her
regular, white teeth and vivid coloring emphasized by her olive skin
and her startling hair, black as Brandon's own. "Perhaps I would like
a scientist better than an I-P officer, anyway. The more I think of it,
the surer I am that Nadia Newton had the right idea. I believe that
I'll catch me a physicist, too--either of you would do quite nicely,
I think," and she studied the two men carefully.
Westfall, the methodical and precise, had never been able to defend
himself against Verna Pickering's badinage, but Brandon's ready tongue
took up the challenge.
"Verna, if you really decided to get any living man he wouldn't stand a
chance in the world," he declared. "If you've already made up your mind
that I'm your meat, I'll come down like Davy Crockett's coon. But if
either of us will do, that'll give us each a fifty-fifty chance to
escape your toils. What say we play a game of freeze-out to decide it?"
"Fine, Norman! When shall we play?"
"Oh, between Wednesday and Thursday, any week you say," and the two
fenced on, banteringly but skilfully, with Westfall an appreciative and
unembarrassed listener.
Dinner over, Brandon and Westfall went back to the control room, where
they found Stevens already seated at one of the master screens.
"All x, Perce?"
"All x. The observers report no registrations during the last two
watches," and the three fell into discussion. Long they talked, studying
every angle of the situation confronting them; until suddenly a speaker
rattled furiously and an enormous, staring eye filled both master
plates. Brandon's hand flashed to a switch, but the image disappeared
even before he could establish the full-coverage ray screen.
"I'm on the upper band--take the lower!" he snapped, but Stevens'
projector was already in action. Trained minds all, they knew that some
intelligence had traced them, and all realized that it was of the utmost
importance to know what and where that intelligence was. Stevens found
the probing frequency in his range and they flashed their own beam along
it, encountering finally one of the monstrous Vorkulian fortresses, far
from Jupiter and almost directly between them and the planet! Its wall
screens were in operation, and no frequency at their command could
penetrate that neutralizing blanket of vibrations.
"What kind of an eye was that--ever see anything like it, Perce?"
Brandon demanded.
"I don't think so, though of course we got only an awfully short flash
of it. It didn't look like the periscopic eyes that those flying snakes
had--looked more like a hexan eye, don't you think? Couldn't very well
be hexan, though, in that kind of a ship."
"Don't think so, either. Maybe it's a purely mechanical affair that they
use for observing. Anyway, old sons, I don't like the looks of things at
all. Quince, you're the brains of this outfit--shift the massive old
intellect into high and tell us what to do."
Westfall, staring into the eyepiece of the filar micrometer, finished
measuring the apparent size of the heptagon before he turned toward
Stevens and Brandon.
"It is hard to decide upon a course of action, since anything that we
do may prove to be wrong," he said, slowly. "However, I do not see that
this latest development can operate to change the plan we have already
adopted; that of running away, straight out from the sun. We may have
to increase our acceleration to the highest value the women and babies
can stand. A series of observations of our pursuer will, of course, be
necessary to decide that point. It would be useless to go to Titan,
for they would be powerless to help us. We could not hold their mirror
upon either the _Sirius_ or their torpedoes against such forces as that
fortress has at her command. Then, too, we might well be bringing down
upon them an enemy who would destroy much of their world before he could
be stopped. Both Uranus and Neptune are approximately upon our present
course. Do the Titanians know anything of either of them, Steve?"
"Not a thing," the computer replied. "They can't get nearly as far as
Uranus on their power beam--it's all they can do to make Jupiter. They
seem to think, though, that one or more of the satellites of Uranus or
Neptune may be inhabited by beings similar to themselves, only perhaps
even more so. But considering the difference between what we found on
the Jovian satellites and on Titan, I'd say that anything might be out
there--on Uranus, Neptune, their satellites, or anywhere else."
"Cancel Uranus, and double that for Neptune," Brandon commanded.
"Realize how far away they are?"
"That's right, too," agreed Stevens. "Before we got there, with any
acceleration we can use now, this whole mess will be cleaned up, one way
or the other."
  *  *  *  *  *
Westfall completed the series of observations and calculated his
results. Then, with a grave face, he went to consult the medical
officers. The women, children, and the two Martian scientists were sent
to the sick-bay and the acceleration was raised slowly to twenty meters
per second per second, above which point the physicians declared they
should not go unless it became absolutely necessary. Then the scientists
met again--met without Alcantro and Fedanzo, who lay helpless upon
narrow hospital bunks, unable even to lift their massive arms.
While Westfall made another series of precise measurements of the
super-dreadnought of space so earnestly pursuing them, Brandon stumbled
heavily about the room, hands jammed deep into pockets, eyes unseeing
emitting clouds of smoke from his villainously reeking pipe. The
Venetians, lacking Brandon's physical strength and by nature quieter of
disposition, sat motionless; keen minds hard at work. Stevens sat at the
calculating machine, absently setting up and knocking down weird and
meaningless integrals, while he also concentrated upon the problem
before them.
"They are still gaining, but comparatively slowly," Westfall finally
reported. "They seem to be...."
"In that case we may be all x," Brandon interrupted, brandishing his
pipe vigorously. "We know that they're on a beam--apparently we're the
only ones hereabouts having cosmic power. If we can keep away from them
until their beam attenuates, we can whittle 'em down to our size and
then take them, no matter how much accumulator capacity they've got."
"But can we keep away from them that long?" asked Dol Kenor, pointedly;
and his fellow Venerian also had a question to propound:
"Would it not be preferable to lead them in a wide circle, back to a
rendezvous with the Space Fleet, which will probably be ready by the
time of meeting?"
"I am afraid that that would be useless," Westfall frowned in thought.
"Given power, that fortress could destroy the entire Fleet almost as
easily as she could wipe out the _Sirius_ alone."
"Kenor's right." Stevens spoke up from the calculator. "You're getting
too far ahead of the situation. We aren't apt to keep ahead of them long
enough to do much leading anywhere. The Titanians can hold a beam
together from Saturn to Jupiter--why can't these snake-folks?"
"Several reasons," Brandon argued stubbornly. "First place, look at the
mass of that thing, and remember that the heavier the beam the harder
it is to hold it together. Second, there's no evidence that they wander
around much in space. If their beams are designed principally for travel
upon Jupiter, why should they have any extraordinary range? I say they
can't hold that beam forever. We've got a good long lead, and in spite
of their higher acceleration, I think we'll be able to keep out of range
of their heavy stuff. If so, we'll trace a circle--only one a good deal
bigger than the one Amonar suggested--and meet the fleet at a point
where that enemy ship will be about out of power."
Thus for hours the scientists argued, agreeing upon nothing, while
the Vorkulian fortress crept ever closer. At the end of three days of
the mad flight, the pursuing space ship was in plain sight, covering
hundreds of divisions of the micrometer screens. But now the size of
the images was increasing with extreme slowness, and the scientists
of the _Sirius_ watched with strained attention the edges of those
glowing green pictures. Finally, when the pictured edges were about
to cease moving across the finely-ruled lines, Brandon cut down his
own acceleration a trifle, and kept on decreasing it at such a rate
that the heptagon still crept up, foot by foot.
"Hey what's the big idea?" Stevens demanded.
"Coax 'em along. If we run away from them they'll probably reverse power
and go back home, won't they? Their beam is falling apart fast, but
they're still getting so much stuff along it that we couldn't do a thing
to stop them. If they think that we're losing power even faster than
they are, though, they'll keep after us until their beam's so thin that
they'll just be able to stop on it. Then they'll reverse or else go onto
their accumulators--reverse, probably, since they'll be a long ways from
home by that time. We'll reverse, too, and keep just out of range. Then,
when we both have stopped and are about to start back, their beam will
be at its minimum and we'll go to work on 'em--foot, horse, and marines.
Nobody can run us as ragged as they've been doing and get away with it
as long as I'm conscious and stand a chance in the world of hanging one
onto their chins in retaliation. I've got a hunch. If it works, we can
take those birds alone, and take 'em so they'll _stay_ took. We might as
well break up--this is going to be an ordinary job of piloting for a few
days, I think. I'm going up and work with the Martians on that hunch.
You fellows work out any ideas you want to. Watch 'em close, Mac. Keep
kidding 'em along, but don't let them get close enough to puncture us."
  *  *  *  *  *
Everything worked out practically as Brandon had foretold, and a few
days later, their acceleration somewhat less than terrestrial gravity,
he called another meeting in the control room. He came in grinning from
ear to ear, accompanied by the two Martians, and seated himself at his
complex power panel.
"Now watch the professor closely, gentlemen," he invited. "He is going
to cut that beam."
"But you can't," protested Pyraz Amonar.
"I know you can't, ordinarily, when a beam is tight and solid. But
that beam's as loose as ashes right now. I told you I had a hunch, and
Alcantro and Fedanzo worked out the right answer for me. If I can cut
it, Quince, and if their screens go down for a minute, shoot your
visiray into them and see what you can see."
"All x. How much power are you going to draw?"
"Plenty--it figures a little better than four hundred thousand
kilofranks. I'll draw it all from the accumulators, so as not to
disturb you fellows on the cosmic intake. We don't care if we do run the
batteries down some, but I don't want to hold that load on the bus-bars
very long. However, if my hunch is right, I won't be on that beam five
minutes before it's cut from Jupiter--and I'll bet you four dollars that
you won't see the original crew in that fort when you get into it."
He set upper and lower bands of dirigible projectors to apply a
powerful sidewise thrust, and the _Sirius_ darted off her course.
Flashing a minute pencil behind the huge heptagon, Brandon manipulated
his tuning circuits until a brilliant spot in space showed him that he
was approaching resonance with the heptagon's power beam. Micrometer
dials were then engaged and the delicate tuning continued until the
meters gave evidence that the two beams were precisely synchronized and
exactly opposite in phase. Four plunger switches closed, that tiny pilot
ray became an enormous rod of force, and as those two gigantic beams met
in exact opposition and neutralized each other, a solid wall of blinding
brilliance appeared in the empty ether behind the Vorkulian fortress. As
that dazzling wall sprang into being, the sparkling green protection
died from the walls of the heptagon.
"Go to it, Quince!" Brandon yelled, but the suggestion was entirely
superfluous. Even before the wall-screen had died, Westfall's beam was
trying to get through it, and when the visiray revealed the interior of
the heptagon, the quiet and methodical physicist was shaken from his
habitual calm.
"Why, they aren't the winged monsters at all--they're _hexans_!"
he exclaimed.
"Sure they are." Brandon did not even turn his heavily-goggled eyes
from the blazing blankness of his own screen. "That was my hunch. Those
snakes went about things in a business-like fashion. They didn't strike
me as being folks who would pull off such a wild stunt as trying to
chase us clear out of the solar system, but a gang of hexans would do
just that. Some of them must have captured that ship and, already having
it in their cock-eyed brains that we were back of what happened on
Callisto, they decided to bump us off if it was the last thing they ever
did. That's what I'd do myself, if I were a hexan. Now I'll tell you
what's happening back at the home power plant of that ship and what's
going to happen next. I'm kicking up a horrible row out there with my
interference, and a lot of instruments at the other end of that beam
must be cutting up all kinds of didoes, right now. They'll check up on
that ship with the expedition, by radio and what-not, and when they find
out that it's clear out here--chop! Didn't get to see much, did you?"
"No, they must have switched over to their accumulators almost
instantly."
"Yeah, but if they've got accumulator capacity enough to hold off our
entire cosmic intake and get back to Jupiter besides, I'm a polyp! We're
going to take that ship, fellows, and learn a lot of stuff we never
dreamed of before. Ha! There goes his beam--pay me the four, Quince."
The dazzling wall of incandescence had blinked out without warning, and
Brandon's beam bored on through space, unimpeded. He shut it off and
turned to his fellows with a grin--a grin which disappeared instantly
as a thought struck him and he leaped back to his board.
"Sound the high-acceleration warning quick, Perce!" he snapped, and
drove in switch after switch.
"Cosmic intake's gone down to zero!" exclaimed MacDonald, as the
_Sirius_ leaped away.
"Had to cut it--they might shoot a jolt through that band. Just thought
of something. Maybe unnecessary, but no harm done if ... it's necessary,
all x--we're taking a sweet kissing right now. You see, even though
we're at pretty long range, they've got some horrible projectors, and
they were evidently mad enough to waste some power taking a good, solid
flash at us--and if we hadn't been expecting it, that flash would have
been a bountiful sufficiency, believe me--Great Cat! Look at that
meter--and I've had to throw in number ten shunt! The outer screen is
drawing five hundred and forty thousand!"
  *  *  *  *  *
They stared at the meter in amazement. It was incredible, even after
they had seen those heptagons in action, that at such extreme range
any offensive beam could be driven with such unthinkable power--power
requiring for its neutralization almost the full output of the
prodigious batteries of accumulators carried by the _Sirius_! Yet for
five, ten, fifteen, twenty minutes that beam drove furiously against
their straining screens, and even Brandon's face grew tense and hard
as that frightful attack continued. At the end of twenty-two minutes,
however, the pointer of the meter snapped back to the pin and every
man there breathed an explosive sigh of relief--the almost unbearable
bombardment was over; the screen was drawing only its maintenance load.
"Wow!" Brandon shouted. "I thought for a minute they were going to hang
to us until we cracked, even if it meant that they'd have to freeze to
death out here themselves!"
"It would have meant that, too, don't you think?" asked Stevens.
"I imagine so--don't see how they could possibly have enough power left
to get back to Jupiter if they shine that thing on us much longer. Of
course, the more power they waste on us, the quicker we can take them;
but I don't want much more of that beam, I'll tell the world--I just
about had heart failure before they cut off!"
The massive heptagon was now drifting back toward Jupiter at constant
velocity. The hexans were apparently hoarding jealously their remaining
power, for their wall screens did not flash on at the touch of the
visiray. Through unresisting metal the probing Terrestrial beams sped,
and the scientists studied minutely every detail of the Vorkulian
armament; while the regular observers began to make a detailed
photographic survey of every room and compartment of the great fortress.
Much of the instrumentation and machinery was familiar, but some of it
was so strange that study was useless--days of personal inspection and
experiment, perhaps complete dismantling, would be necessary to reveal
the secrets hidden within those peculiar mechanisms.
"They're trying to save all the power they can--think I'll make them
spend some more," Brandon remarked, and directed against the heptagon a
heavy destructive beam. "We don't want them to get back to Jupiter until
after we've boarded them and found out everything we want to know. Come
here, Quince--what do you make of this?"
Both men stared at the heptagon, frankly puzzled; for the screens of the
strange vessel did not radiate, nor did the material of the walls yield
under the terrible force of the beam. The destructive ray simply struck
that dull green surface and vanished--disappeared without a trace, as a
tiny stream of water disappears into a partially-soaked sponge.
"Do you know what you are doing?" asked Westfall, after a few minutes'
thought. "I believe that you are charging their accumulators at the rate
of," he glanced at a meter, "exactly thirty-one thousand five hundred
kilofranks."
"Great Cat!" Brandon's hand flashed to a switch and the beam expired.
"But they can't just simply grab it and store it, Quince--it's
impossible!"
"The word 'impossible' in that connection, coming from you, has a queer
sound," Westfall said pointedly and Brandon actually blushed.
"That's right, too--we have got pretty much the same idea in our cosmic
intake fields, but we didn't carry things half as far as they have done.
Huh! They're flashing us again ... but those thin little beams don't
mean anything. They're just trying to make us feed them some more, I
guess. But we've got to hold them back some way--wonder if they can
absorb a tractor field?"
The hexans had lashed out a few times with their lighter weapons,
but, finding the _Sirius_ unresponsive, had soon shut them off and were
stolidly plunging along toward Jupiter. Brandon flung out a tractor rod
and threw the mass of his cruiser upon it as it locked into those sullen
green walls. But as soon as the enemy felt its drag, their screens
flared white, and the massive Terrestrial space-ship quivered in every
member as that terrific cable of force was snapped.
"They apparently cannot store up the energy of a tractor," commented
Westfall, "but you will observe that they have no difficulty in
radiating when they care to."
"Those two ideas didn't pan out so heavy. There's lots of things not
tried yet, though. Our next best bet is to get around in front of him
and push back. If they wiggle away from more than fifty percent of a
pressor, they're really good."
The pilot maneuvered the _Sirius_ into line, directly between Jupiter
and the pentagon; and as the driving projectors went into action,
Brandon drove a mighty pressor field along their axis, squarely into the
center of mass of the Vorkulian fortress. For a moment it held solidly,
then, as the screens of the enemy went into action, it rebounded and
glanced off in sparkling, cascading torrents. But the hexans, with all
their twisting and turning, could not present to that prodigious beam of
force any angle sufficiently obtuse to rob it of half its power, and the
driving projectors of the pentagon again burst into activity as the
backward-pushing mass of the _Sirius_ made itself felt. In a short time,
however, the wall-screens were again cut off--apparently more power was
required to drive them than they were able to deflect.
Although even the enormous tonnage of the Terrestrial cruiser was
insignificant in comparison with the veritable mountain of metal to
which she was opposed, so that the fiercest thrust of her driving
projectors did not greatly affect the monster's progress; yet Brandon
and his cohorts were well content.
"It's a long trip back to where they came from, and since they wanted
to drift all the way, I think they'll be out of power before they get
there," Brandon summed up the situation. "We aren't losing any power,
either, since we are using only a part of our cosmic intake."
In a few hours the struggle had settled down to a routine matter--the
_Sirius_ being pushed backward steadily against the full drive of her
every projector, contesting stubbornly every mile of space traversed.
Assured that the regular pilots and lookouts were fully capable
of handling the vessel, the scientists were about to resume their
interrupted tasks when one of the photographers called them over to look
at something he had discovered in one of the lowermost and smallest
compartments of the heptagon. All crowded around the screens, and saw
pictured there the winged, snake-like form of one of the original crew
of the Vorkulian vessel!
"Dead?" Brandon asked.
"Not yet," replied the photographer. "He is twitching a little once in
a while, but you see, he's pretty badly cut up."
"I see he is ... he must have a lot of vitality to have lasted this
long--may be he'll live through it yet. Hold him on the plate, and get
his exact measurements." He turned to the communicator. "Doctor von
Steiffel? Can you come down to the control room a minute? We may want
you to operate upon one of these South Jovians after a while."
"_Himmel! Es ... ist ... der...._" The great surgeon, bearded and
massive, stared into the plate, and in his surprise started to speak
in his native German. He paused, his long, powerful fingers tracing the
likeness of the Vorkul upon the plate, then went on: "I would like very
much to operate, but, not understanding our intentions, he would, of
course, struggle. And when that body struggles--_schrecklichkeit_!" and
he waved his arms in a pantomime of wholesale destruction.
"I thought of that--that's why I am talking to you now instead of when
we get to him, two or three days from now. We'll give you his exact
measurements, and a crew of mechanics will, under your direction, sink
holes in the steel floor and install steel bands heavy enough to hold
him rigid, from tailfins to wing-tips. We'll hold him there until we can
make him understand that we're friends. It is of the utmost importance
to save that creature's life if possible; because we do not want one of
their fortresses launched against us--and in any event, it will not do
us any harm to have a friend in the City of the South."
"Right. I will also have prepared some kind of a space-suit in which
he can be brought from his vessel to ours," and the surgeon took the
measurements and went to see that the "operating table" and suit were
made ready for Kromodeor, the sorely wounded Vorkul.
  *  *  *  *  *
It was not long until the projectors of the heptagon went out and
she lay inert in space, power completely exhausted. Knowing that the
screens of the enemy would absorb any ordinary ray, the scientists had
calculated the most condensed beam they could possibly project, a beam
which, their figures showed, should be able to puncture those screens by
sheer mass action--puncture them practically instantaneously, before the
absorbers could react. To that end they had arranged their circuits to
hurl seven hundred sixty-five thousand kilofranks--the entire power of
their massed accumulators and their highest possible cosmic intake--in
one tiny bar of superlative density, less than one meter in diameter!
Everything ready, Brandon shot in prodigious switches that launched that
bolt--a bolt so vehement, so inconceivably intense, that it seemed
fairly to blast the very ether out of existence as it tore its way along
its carefully predetermined line. The intention was to destroy all the
control panels of the absorber screens; parts so vital that without them
the great vessel would be helpless, and yet items which the Terrestrials
could reconstruct quite readily from their photographs and drawings.
As that irresistible bolt touched the Vorkulian wall-screen, the spot
of contact flared instantaneously through the spectrum and into the
black beyond the violet as that screen overloaded locally. Fast as it
responded and highly conductive though it was, it could not handle that
frightfully concentrated load. In the same fleeting instant of time
every molecule of substance in that beam's path flashed into tenuous
vapor--no conceivable material could resist or impede that stabbing
stiletto of energy--and the main control panel of the Vorkulian
wall-screen system vanished. Time after time, as rapidly as he could
sight his beam and operate his switches, Brandon drove his needle of
annihilation through the fortress, destroying the secondary controls.
Then, the walls unresisting, he cut in the vastly larger, but infinitely
less powerful, I-P ray, and with it systematically riddled the immense
heptagon. Out through the gaping holes in the outer walls rushed the
dense atmosphere of Jupiter, and the hexans in their massed hundreds
died.
The _Sirius_ was brought up beside the heptagon, so that her main
air-lock was against one of the yawning holes in the green metal wall
of the enemy. There she was anchored by tractor beams, and the two
hundred picked men of the I-P police, in full space equipment, prepared
to board the gigantic fortress of the void. Brandon sat tense at his
controls, ready to send his beam ahead of the troopers against any
hexans that might survive in some as yet unpunctured compartment.
General Crowninshield sat beside the physicist at an auxiliary board,
phones at ears and four infra-red visiray plates ranged in front of him;
ready through light or darkness to direct and oversee the attack, no
matter where it might lead or how widely separated the platoons might
become before the citadel was taken.
The space-line men--the engineers of weightless combat--led the van,
protected by the projectors of their fellows. Theirs the task to set up
ways of rope, along which the others could advance. Power drills bit
savagely into metal, making holes to receive the expanding eyebolts;
grappling hooks seized fast every protuberance and corner; points of
little stress were supported by powerful suction cups; and at intervals
were strung beam-fed lanterns, illuminating brilliantly the line of
march. Through compartments and down corridors they went, bridging the
many gaps in the metal through which Brandon's beams had blasted their
way; guided by Crowninshield along the shortest feasible path toward the
little projector room in which Kromodeor, the wounded Vorkul, lay. There
were so many chambers and compartments in the heptagon that it had, of
course, been impossible to puncture them all, and in some of the tight
rooms were groups of hexans, anxious to do battle. But the general's eye
led his men, and if such a room lay before them, Brandon's frightful
beam entered it first--and where that beam entered, life departed.
But the hexans were really intelligent, as has been said. They had had
time to prepare for what they knew awaited them, and they were rendered
utterly desperate by the knowledge that, no matter what might happen,
their course was run. Their power was gone, and even if the present
enemy should be driven off, they would float idly in space until they
died of cold; or, more probably, hurtling toward Jupiter as they were,
they would plunge to certain death upon its surface as soon as they came
within its powerful gravitational field. Therefore some fifty of the
creatures, who had had space experience in their spherical vessels,
had spent the preceding days in manufacturing space equipment. Let the
weight-fiends plan upon detonating magazines of explosives, upon laying
mines calculated to destroy the invaders, even the vessel itself and
all within it. Let them plan upon any other such idle schemes, which
were certain to be foreseen and guarded against by the space-hardened
veterans who undoubtedly moaned that all-powerful and vengeful football
of scarred gray metal. Space-fighters were they, and as space-fighters
would they die; taking with them to their own inevitable death a full
quota of the enemy.
  *  *  *  *  *
Thus it came about that the head of the column of police had scarcely
passed a certain door, when in the room behind it there began to
assemble the half-hundred spacehounds of the hexans. When the vanguard
had approached that room, Crowninshield had inspected it thoroughly with
his infra-red beams. He had found it punctured and airless, devoid of
life or of lethal devices, and had passed on. But now the space-suited
warriors of the horde, guided in their hiding by their own visirays,
were massing there. When the center of the I-P column reached that door,
it burst open. There boiled out into the corridor, into the very midst
of the police, fifty demoniacal hexans, fighting with Berserk fury,
ruled by but one impulse--to kill.
Hand-weapons flashed viciously, tearing at steel armor and at bulging
space-suits. Space-hooks bit and tore. Pikes and lances were driven with
the full power of brawny arms. Here and there could be seen trooper and
hexan, locked together in fierce embrace far from any hand-line--six
limbs against four, all ten plied with abandon in mortal, hand-to-hand,
foot-to-foot combat.
"Give way!" yelled Crowninshield into the ears of his men. "Epstein,
back! LeFevre, advance! Get out of block ten--give us a chance to use
a beam!"
As the police fell back out of the designated section of the corridor,
Brandon's beam tore through it, filling it from floor to ceiling with
a volume of intolerable energy. In that energy walls, doorway, and
space-lines, as well as most of the hexans, vanished utterly. But the
beam could not be used again. Every surviving enemy had hurled himself
frantically into the thickest ranks of the police and the battle raged
fiercer than ever. It did not last long. The ends of the column had
already closed in. The police filled the corridor and overflowed into
the yawning chasm cut by the annihilating ray. Outnumbered, surrounded
upon all sides, above, and below by the Terrestrials, the hexans fought
with mad desperation to the last man--and to the last man died. And even
though in lieu of their own highly efficient space-armor they had fought
in weak, crude, and hastily improvised space-suits, which were pitifully
inferior to the ray resistant, heavy steel armor of the I-P forces,
nevertheless the enormous strength and utter savagery of the hexans had
taken toll; and when the advance was resumed, it was with extra lookouts
scanning the entire neighborhood of the line of march.
Since the troops had entered the fortress as close to their goal as
possible, it was not long until the leading platoon reached the door
behind which Kromodeor lay. Tools and cylinders of air were brought up,
and the engineers quickly fitted pressure bulkheads across the corridor.
There was a screaming hiss from the valves, the atmosphere in that
walled-off space became dense, and mechanics attacked with their power
drills the door of the projector room. It opened, and four husky
orderlies rapidly but gently encased the long body of the Vorkul in the
space-suit built especially to receive it. As that monstrous form in
its weirdly bulging envelope was guided through the air-locks into the
_Sirius_, Crowninshield barked orders into his transmitter and the
police reformed. They would now systematically scour the fortress, to
wipe out any hexans that might still be in hiding; to discover and
destroy any possible traps or infernal machines which the enemy might
have planted for their undoing.
Assured that the real danger to the _Sirius_ was over and that his
presence was no longer necessary, Brandon turned his controls over to an
assistant and went up to the Venerian rooms, where von Steiffel and his
staff were to operate upon the Vorkul. There, in the dense, hot air, but
little different now from the atmosphere of Jupiter, Kromodeor lay;
bolted down to the solid steel of the floor by means of padded steel
straps. So heavy were the bands that he could not possibly break even
one of them; so closely were they spaced that he could scarcely have
moved a muscle had he tried. But he did not try--so near death was he
that his mighty muscles did not even quiver at the trenchant bite of the
surgeon's tools. Von Steiffel and his aides, meticulously covered with
sterile gowns, hoods, and gloves, worked in most rigidly aseptic style;
deftly and rapidly closing the ghastly wounds inflicted by the weapons
of the hexans.
"Hi, Brandon," the surgeon grunted as he straightened up, the work
completed. "I did not use much antiseptic on him. Because of possible
differences in blood chemistry and in ignorance of his native bacteria,
I depended almost wholly upon asepsis and his natural resistance. It is
a good thing that we did not have to use an anaesthetic. He is in bad
shape, but if we can feed him successfully, he may pull through."
"Feed him? I never thought of that. What d'you suppose he eats?"
"I have an idea that it is something highly concentrated, from his
anatomy. I shall try giving him sugar, milk chocolate, something of
the kind. First I shall try maple syrup. Being a liquid, it is easily
administered, and its penetrating odor also may be a help."
  *  *  *  *  *
A can of the liquid was brought in and to the amazement of the
Terrestrials, the long, delicate antennae of the Vorkul began to twitch
as soon as the can was opened. Motioning hastily for silence, von
Steiffel filled a bowl and placed it upon the floor beneath Kromodeor's
grotesque nose. The twitching increased, until finally one dull, glazed
eye brightened somewhat and curled slowly out upon its slender pedicle,
toward the dish. His mouth opened sluggishly and a long, red tongue
reached out, but as his perceptions quickened, he became conscious of
the strangers near him. The mouth snapped shut, the eye retracted, and
heaving, rippling surges traversed that powerful body as he struggled
madly against the unbreakable shackles of steel binding him to the floor.
"_Ach, kindlein_!" The surgeon bent anxiously over that grotesque but
frightened head; soothing, polysyllabic German crooning from his bearded
lips.
"Here, let's try this--I'm good on it," Stevens suggested, bringing up
the Callistonian thought exchanger. All three men donned headsets, and
sent wave after wave of friendly and soothing thoughts toward that
frantic and terrified brain.
"He's got his brain shut up like a clam!" Brandon snorted. "Open up,
guy--we aren't going to hurt you! We're the best friends you've got,
if you only knew it!"
"Himmel, und he iss himself killing!" moaned von Steiffel.
"One more chance that might work," and Brandon stepped over to the
communicator, demanding that Verna Pickering be brought at once. She
came in as soon as the air-locks would permit, and the physicist
welcomed her eagerly.
"This fellow's fighting so he's tearing himself to pieces. We can't make
him receive a thought, and von Steiffel's afraid to use an anaesthetic.
Now it's barely possible that he may understand hexan. I thought you
wasted time learning any of it, but maybe you didn't--see if you can
make him understand that we're friends."
The girl flinched and shrank back involuntarily, but forced herself to
approach that awful head. Bending over, she repeated over and over one
harsh, barking syllable. The effect of that word was magical. Instantly
Kromodeor ceased struggling, an eye curled out, and that long, supple
tongue flashed down and into the syrup. Not until the last sticky trace
had been licked from the bowl did his attention wander from the food.
Then the eye, sparkling brightly now, was raised toward the girl.
Simultaneously four other eyes arose, one directed at each of the men
and the other surveying his bonds and the room in which he was. Then the
Vorkul spoke, but his whistling, hissing manner of speech so garbled
the barking sounds of the hexan words he was attempting to utter, that
Verna's slight knowledge of the language was of no use. She therefore
put on one of the headsets, motioning the men to do the same, and
approached Kromodeor with the other, repeating the hexan word of
friendly import. This time the Vorkul's brain was not sealed against
the visitors and thoughts began to flow.
"You've used those things a lot," Brandon turned to Stevens in a quick
aside. "Can you hide your thoughts?"
"Sure--why?"
"All I can think of is that power system of theirs, and he'd know what
we were going to do, sure. And I'd better be getting at it anyway. So
you can wipe that off your mind with a clear conscience--the rest of us
will get everything they've got there. Your job's to get everything you
can out of this bird's brain. All x?"
"All x."
"Why, you didn't put yours on!" Verna exclaimed.
"No, I don't think I'll have time. If I get started talking to him now,
I'd be here from now on, and I've got a lot of work to do. Steve can
talk to him for me--see you later," and Brandon was gone.
He went directly to the Vorkulian fortress, bare now of hexan life and
devoid of hexan snares and traps. There he and his fellows labored day
after day learning every secret of every item of armament and equipment
aboard the heptagon.
"Did you finish up today, Norm?" asked Stevens one evening. "Kromodeor's
coming to life fast. He's able to wiggle around a little now, and is
insisting that we take off the one chain we keep on him and let him use
a plate, to call his people."
"All washed up. Guess I'll go in and talk to him--you all say he's such
an egg. With this stuff off my mind I can hide it well enough. By the
way, what does he eat?" And the two friends set out for the Venerian
rooms.
"Anything that's sweet, apparently, with just enough milk to furnish a
little protein. Won't eat meat or vegetables at all--von Steiffel says
they haven't got much of a digestive tract, and I know that they haven't
got any teeth. He's already eaten most all the syrup we had on board,
all of the milk chocolate, and a lot of the sugar. But none of us can
get any kind of a raise out of him at all--not even Nadia, when she fed
him a whole box of chocolates."
"No, I mean what does he eat when he's home?"
"It seems to be a sort of syrup, made from the juices of jungle plants,
which they drag in on automatic conveyors and process on automatic
machinery. But he's a funny mutt--hard to get. Some of his thoughts are
lucid enough, but others we can't make out at all--they are so foreign
to all human nature that they simply do not register as thoughts at all.
One funny thing, he isn't the least bit curious about anything. He
doesn't want to examine anything, doesn't ask us any questions, and
won't tell us anything about anything, so that all we know about him we
found out purely by accident. For instance, they like games and sports,
and seem to have families. They also have love, liking, and respect for
others of their own race--but they seem to have no emotions whatever for
outsiders. They're utterly inhuman--I can't describe it--you'll have to
get it for yourself."
"Did you find out about the Callistonians who went to see them?"
"Negatively, yes. They never arrived. They probably couldn't see in the
fog and must have missed the city. If they tried to land in that jungle,
it was just too bad!"
"That would account for everything. So they're strictly neutral, eh?
Well, I'll tell him 'hi,' anyway." Now in the sickroom, Brandon picked
up the headset and sent out a wave of cheery greeting.
To his amazement, the mind of the Vorkul was utterly unresponsive
to his thoughts. Not disdainful, not inimical; not appreciative, nor
friendly--simply indifferent to a degree unknown and incomprehensible to
any human mind. He sent Brandon only one message, which came clear and
coldly emotionless.
"I do not want to talk to you. Tell the hairy doctor that I am now
strong enough to be allowed to go to the communicator screen. That is
all." The Vorkul's mind again became an oblivious maze of unintelligible
thoughts. Not deliberately were Kromodeor's thoughts hidden; he was
constitutionally unable to interest himself in the thoughts or things of
any alien intelligence.
"Well, that for that." A puzzled, thoughtful look came over Brandon's
face as he called von Steiffel. "A queer duck, if there ever was one.
However, their ship will never bother us, that's one good thing; and
I think we've got about everything of theirs that we want, anyway."
The surgeon, after a careful examination of his patient, unlocked the
heavy collar with which he had been restraining the over-anxious Vorkul,
and supported him lightly at the communicator panel. As surely as though
he had used those controls for years Kromodeor shot the visiray beam out
into space. One hand upon each of the several dials and one eye upon
each meter, it was a matter only of seconds for him to get in touch with
Vorkulia. To the Terrestrials the screen was a gray and foggy blank; but
the manifest excitement shrieking and whistling from the speaker in
response to Kromodeor's signals made it plain that his message was being
received with enthusiasm.
"They are coming," the Vorkul thought, and lay back, exhausted.
"Just as well that they're comin' out here, at that," Brandon commented.
"We couldn't begin to handle that structure anywhere near Jupiter--in
fact, we wouldn't want to get very close ourselves, with passengers
aboard."
Such was the power of the Vorkulian vessels that in less than twenty
hours another heptagon slowed to a halt beside the _Sirius_ and two of
its crew were wafted aboard.
They were ushered into the Venerian room, where they talked briefly with
their wounded fellow before they dressed him in a space-suit, which
they filled with air to their own pressure. Then all three were lifted
lightly into the air, and without a word or a sign were borne through
the air-locks of the vessel, and into an opening in the wall of the
rescuing heptagon. A green tractor beam reached out, seizing the
derelict, and both structures darted away at such a pace that in a few
minutes they had disappeared in the black depths of space.
"Well--that, as I may have remarked before, is indisputably and
conclusively that." Brandon broke the surprised, almost stunned, silence
that followed the unceremonious departure of the visitors. "I don't know
whether to feel relieved at the knowledge that they won't bother us, or
whether to get mad because they won't have anything to do with us."
He sent the "All x" signal to the pilot and the _Sirius_, once more at
the acceleration of Terrestrial gravity, again bored on through space.
CHAPTER XIII
Spacehounds Triumphant
Now that the hexan threat that had so long oppressed the humanity of the
_Sirius_ was lifted, that dull gray football of armor steel was filled
with relief and rejoicing as the pilot laid his course for Europa.
Lounges and saloons resounded with noise as police, passengers, and such
of the crew as were at liberty made merry. The control room, in which
were grouped the leaders of the expedition and the scientists, was
orderly enough, but a noticeable undertone of gladness had replaced the
tense air it had known so long.
"Hi, men!" Nadia Stevens and Verna Pickering, arms around each other's
waists, entered the room and saluted the group gaily before they became
a part of it.
"'Smatter, girls--tired of dancing already?" asked Brandon.
"Oh, no--we could dance from now on," Verna assured him. "But you see,
Nadia hadn't seen that husband of hers for fifteen minutes, and was
getting lonesome. Being afraid of all you men, she wanted me to come
along for moral support. The real reason I came, though," and she
narrowed her expressive eyes and lowered her voice mysteriously, "is
that you two physicists are here. I want to study my chosen victims a
little longer before I decide over which of you to cast the spell of
my fatal charm."
"But you can't do that," he objected, vigorously. "Quince and I are
going to settle that ourselves some day--by shooting dice, or maybe each
other, or...." he broke off, listening to an animated conversation going
on behind them.
"... just simply outrageous!" Nadia was exclaiming. "Here we saved his
life, and I fed him a lot of my candy, and we went to all the trouble of
bringing their ship back here almost to Jupiter for them, and then they
simply dashed off without a word of thanks or anything! And he always
acted as though he never wanted to see or hear of any of us again, ever!
Why, they don't _think_ straight--as Norman would say it, they're _full_
of little red _ants_! Why, they aren't even _human_!"
"Sure not." Brandon turned to the flushed speaker. "They couldn't be,
hardly, with their make-up. But is it absolutely necessary that all
intelligent beings should possess such an emotion as gratitude? Such a
being without it does seem funny to us, but I can't see that its lack
necessarily implies anything particularly important. Keep still a
minute," he went on, as Nadia tried to interrupt him, "and listen to
some real wisdom. Quince, _you_ tell 'em."
"They are, of course, very highly developed and extremely intelligent;
but it should not be surprising that intelligence should manifest
itself in ways quite baffling to us human beings, whose minds work so
differently. They are, however ... well, peculiar."
"I _won't_ keep still!" Nadia burst out, at the first opportunity.
"I don't want to talk about those hideous things any more, anyway.
Come on, Steve, let's go up and dance!"
Crowninshield turned to Verna, with the obvious intention of leading
her away, but Brandon interposed.
"Sorry, Crown, but this lady is conducting a highly important
psychological research, so your purely social claims will have to wait
until after the scientific work is done."
"Why narrow the field of investigation?" laughed the girl. "I'd rather
widen it, myself--I might prefer a general, even to a physicist!"
They went up to the main saloon and joined the mle there, and after
one dance with Verna--all he could claim in that crowd of
men--Crowninshield turned to Brandon.
"You two seem to know Miss Pickering extraordinarily well. Would I be
stepping on your toes if I give her a play?"
"Clear ether as far as we're concerned." Brandon shrugged his shoulders.
"She's been kicking around under foot ever since she was knee high to a
duck--we gave her her first lessons on a slide rule."
"Don't be dumb, Norman. That woman's a knock-out--a riot--a regular
tri-planet call-out!"
"Oh, she's all x, as far as that goes. She's a good little scout,
too--not half as dumb as she acts--and she's one of the squarest little
aces that ever waved a plume; but as for _playing_ her--too much like
our kid sister."
"Good--me for her!" and they made their way back down to the control
room.
Stevens, after his one dance with Nadia, had already returned. Brandon
and Crowninshield found him seated at the calculating machine,
continuing a problem which already filled several pages of his notebook.
"'Smatter, Steve? So glad to see a calculator and some paper that you
can't let them alone?"
"Not exactly--just had a thought a day or so ago. Been computing the
orbit of the wreckage of the _Arcturus_ around Jupiter. Think we should
salvage it--the upper half, at least. It was left intact, you know."
"H ... m ... m. That would be nice, all right. Dope enough?"
"Got the direction solid, from my own observations; the velocity's a
pretty rough approximation though. But after allowing for my probable
error, it figures an ellipse of low eccentricity, between the orbits of
Io and Europa. Its period is short--about two days."
"Isn't it wonderful to have a brain?" Brandon addressed the room at
large. "The kid's clever. Nobody else would have thought of it, except
maybe Westfall. Let's see your figures. Um ... m ... m. According to
that, we're within an hour of it, right now." He turned to the pilot and
sketched rapidly.
"Get on this line here, please, and decelerate, so that the stuff'll
catch up with us, and pass the word to the lookouts. Stevens and I will
take the bow plates.
"That's a good idea," he went on to Stevens, as they took their places
at main and auxiliary ultra-banks. "Lot of plunder in that ship.
Instruments, boats, and equipment worth millions, besides most of the
junk of the passengers--clothes, trunks, trinkets, and what-not. You're
there, bucko!"
"Thanks, Chief," ... and they fell silent, watching the instruments
carefully, and from time to time making computations from the readings
of the acceleration and flight meters.
"There she is!" An alarm bell had finally sounded, the ultra-lights had
flared out into space, and upon both screens there shone out images of
the closely clustered wreckage of the _Arcturus_. But both men were more
interested just then in the mathematics of the recovery than in the
vessel itself.
"Missed it eight minutes of time and eleven divisions on the scale,"
reported Stevens. "Not so good."
"Not so bad either--I've seen worse computation." Thus lightly was
dismissed a mathematical feat which, a few years earlier, before the
days of I-P computers, would have been deemed worthy of publication in
"The Philosophical Magazine."
  *  *  *  *  *
Director Newton was called in, and it was decided that the many small
fragments of the vessel were not worth saving; that its upper half
was all that they should attempt to tow the enormous distance back to
Tellus. The pace of the _Sirius_ was adjusted to that of the floating
masses, and tractor beams were clamped upon the undamaged portion of the
derelict, and upon the two slices from the nose of the craft. A couple
of the larger fragments of wreckage were also taken, to furnish metal
for the repairs which would be necessary. Acceleration was brought
slowly up to normal, and the battle-scarred cruiser of the void, with
her heavy burden of inert metal, resumed her interrupted voyage toward
Europa; the satellite upon which the passengers and crew of the
ill-fated _Arcturus_ had been so long immured. On she bored through the
ether, detector screens full out and greenly scintillant Vorkulian
wall-screens outlining her football shape in weird and ghastly light;
unafraid now of any possible surviving space-craft of the hexans.
But if the hexans detected her, they made no sign. Perhaps their fleet
had been destroyed utterly; perhaps it had been impressed upon even
their fierce minds that those sparkling green screens were not to be
molested with impunity! The satellite was reached without event and down
into the crater landing shaft the two enormous masses of metal dropped.
Callisto's foremost citizens were on hand to welcome the Terrestrial
rescuers, and revelry reigned supreme in that deeply buried Europan
community. All humanity celebrated. The Callistonians rejoiced because
they were now freed from the age-old oppression of the hexan hordes;
because they could once more extend their civilization over the Jovian
satellites and live again their normal lives upon the surface of those
small worlds.
The Terrestrials were almost equally enthusiastic in the reunion that
marked the end of the long imprisonment of the refugees.
As soon as the hull of the _Arcturus_ had been warmed sufficiently to
permit inspection, its original passengers were allowed to visit it
briefly, to examine and to reclaim their belongings. Of course, some
damage had been done by the cold of interplanetary space, but in general
everything was as they had left it. Stevens and Nadia were among the
first permitted aboard. They went first to the control room, where
Stevens found his bag still lying behind Breckenridge's desk, where he
had thrown it when he first boarded the vessel. Then they made their
way up to Nadia's stateroom, which they found in meticulous order and
spotless in its cleanliness--there is neither dust nor dirt in space.
Nadia glanced about the formal little room and laughed up at her
husband.
"Funny, isn't it, sweetheart, how little we know what to expect? Just
think how surprised I would have been, when I left this room, if I had
been told that I would have a husband before I got back to it!"
Breckenridge's first thought was for his precious triplex automatic
chronometer, which he found, of course, "way off"--six and three-tenths
seconds fast. Having corrected the timepiece from that of the _Sirius_,
he immersed himself in the other delicate instruments of his
department--and he was easy to find from that time on.
Overcrowded as the _Sirius_ already was, it was decided that the
original complement of the _Arcturus_ should occupy their former
quarters aboard her during the return trip. To this end, corps of
mechanics set to work upon the salvaged hulk. Heavy metal work was no
novelty to the Callistonian engineers and mechanics, and the _Sirius_
also was well equipped with metal-working machines and men. Thus the
prow was welded; armored, insulating air-breaks were built along the
stern, which was the plane of hexan cleavage, electrical connections
were restored; and lastly, a set of the great Vorkulian wall-screen
generators, absorbers, and dissipators was installed, with sufficient
accumulator capacity for their operation. Director Newton studied this
installation in silence for some time, then went in search of Brandon.
"I hadn't considered the possibility of being attacked again
between here and Tellus, but there's always the chance," he admitted.
"If you think that there is any danger, we will crowd them all into the
_Sirius_. It will not be at all comfortable, but it will be better than
having any more of us killed."
"With that outfit they'll be as safe as we will," the scientist assured
him. "They can stand as much grief as we can. We'll do the fighting for
the whole outfit from here, and anything we meet will have to take us
before they can touch them. So they had better ride it there, where
they'll have passengers' accommodations and be comfortable. As to
danger, I don't know what to expect. They may all be gone and they may
not. We're going to expect trouble every meter of the way in, though,
and be ready for it."
Everything ready and thoroughly tested, and stream of power flowing
into the _Arcturus_ from the cosmic receptors of her sister ship, the
passengers and their new possessions were moved into their former
quarters. There was a brief ceremony of farewell, the doors of the
airlocks were closed, the careful check-out was gone through, and the
driving projectors of the _Sirius_ lifted both great vessels up the
shaft, slowly and easily. And after them, as long as they could be seen,
stared the thousands of Callistonians who thronged the great shaft's
floor. Many of the spectators were not, strictly speaking, Callistonians
at all. They were really Europans, born and reared in that hidden city
which was to have been the last stronghold of Callisto's civilization.
In that throng were hundreds who had never before seen the light of the
sun nor any of the glories of the firmament, hundreds to whom that brief
glimpse was a foretaste of the free and glorious life which was soon to
be theirs.
Up and up mounted that powerful tug-boat of space, with her heavy barge,
falling smoothly upward at normal acceleration. Below her first Europa,
then mighty Jupiter, became moons growing smaller and smaller. In their
stateroom Nadia's supple waist writhed in the curve of Stevens' arm as
she turned and looked up at him with sparkling eyes.
"Well, big fellow, how does it feel to be out of a job? Or are you going
over there every day on a tractor beam to work, as Norman suggested?"
"Not on your sweet young life!" he exclaimed. "Norm thought he was
kidding somebody, but it registered zero. It gives me the pip to loaf
around when there's a lot of work to do, but this is entirely different.
Nothing's driving us now, and a fellow's entitled to at least one
honeymoon during his life. And what a honeymoon this is going to be,
little spacehound of my heart! Nothing to do but love you all the way
from here to Tellus! Whoopee!"
"Oh, there's a couple of other things to do," she reminded him gaily.
"You've got to smoke a lot of good cigarettes, I must eat a lot of
Delray's chocolates, and we both really should catch up on eating fancy
cooking. Speaking of eating, isn't that the second call for dinner? It
_is_!" and they went along the narrow hall toward the elevator. To these
two the long journey was to seem all too short.
Long though the voyage was, it was uneventful. The occupants of the
two vessels were in constant touch with each other by means of the
communicators, and there was also much visiting back and forth in
person. Stevens and Nadia came often to the _Sirius_, and were
accompanied frequently by Verna Pickering, who claimed anew her ancient
right of "kicking around under foot," wherever Brandon and Westfall
might chance to be--and at such times General Crowninshield was
practically certain to appear. And upon days when the beautiful brunette
did not appear, the commandant generally found it necessary to inspect
in person something in the _Arcturus_.
Day after day passed, and even the new and ultra-powerful detector
screens of the _Sirius_ remained unresponsive and cold. Day after day
the plates before the doubled lookouts and observers remained blank.
Power flowed smoothly and unfailingly into the cosmic receptors, and
the products of conversion were discharged with equal smoothness and
regularity from the forty-five gigantic driving projectors. The tractor
beam held its heavy burden easily and the generators functioned
perfectly. And finally a planet began to loom up in the stern lookout
plates.
Verna, the irrepressible, was in the control room of the _Sirius_,
quarreling adroitly with Brandon and deftly flirting with Crowninshield.
Glancing into the control screen she saw the planet in its end block,
then studied the instruments briefly.
"We're heading for _Mars_!" she declared with conviction. "I thought
it looked that way yesterday, but supposed it must be only apparent--a
trick of piloting or something about the orbit. I thought of course you
were taking us back home--but you can't _possibly_ get to Tellus on any
such course as this!"
"Sure not," Brandon replied easily. "Certainly it's Mars. Isn't that
where the _Arcturus_ started out for? Whoever said we were going to
Tellus? Of course, if any of the passengers want to go right back the
IPC will undoubtedly furnish transportation _gratis_. But paste this in
your hat, Verna, for future reference--when spacehounds start out to go
anywhere they _go_ there, even if they have to spend a year or so on
minus time to do it!"
Closer and closer they approached the red planet, swinging around in a
wide arc in order to make their course coincide exactly with the pilot
ray of check station M14, which was now precisely in its scheduled
location in space. At the chief pilot's desk in the control room of the
_Arcturus_, Breckenridge checked in with the station, then calculated
rapidly the instant of their touching the specially-built bumper
platforms of spring steel, hemp, and fiber which awaited them upon the
Martian dock of the Interplanetary Corporation. Within range of the
terminal, he plugged into it, waited until the tiny light flashed its
green message of attention, and reported.
"IPV _Arcturus_; Breckenridge, Chief Pilot; trip number forty-three
twenty-nine. Checking in--four hundred forty-six days, fifteen hours,
eleven minutes, thirty-eight and seven-tenths seconds minus!"
THE END.
IRRESISTIBLE WEAPON
By H. B. Fyfe
Illustrated by ED EMSH
There's no such thing as a weapon too horrible
to use; weapons will continue to become bigger,
and deadlier. Like other things that can't be
stopped....
In the special observation dome of the colossal command ship just beyond
Pluto, every nervous clearing of a throat rasped through the silence.
Telescopes were available but most of the scientists and high officials
preferred the view on the huge telescreen.
This showed, from a distance of several million miles, one of the small
moons of the frigid planet, so insignificant that it had not been
discovered until man had pushed the boundaries of space exploration past
the asteroids. The satellite was about to become spectacularly
significant, however, as the first target of man's newest, most
destructive weapon.
"I need not remind you, gentlemen," white-haired Co-ordinator Evora of
Mars had said, "that if we have actually succeeded in this race against
our former Centaurian colonies, it may well prevent the imminent
conflict entirely. In a few moments we shall know whether our scientists
have developed a truly irresistible weapon."
Of all the officials, soldiers, and scientists present, Arnold Gibson
was perhaps the least excited. For one thing, he had labored hard to
make the new horror succeed and felt reasonably confident that it would.
The project had been given the attention of every first-class scientific
mind in the Solar System; for the great fear was that the new states on
the Centaurian planets might win the race of discovery and ...
_And bring a little order into this old-fashioned, inefficient fumbling
toward progress_, Gibson thought contemptuously. _Look at them--fools
for all their degrees and titles! They've stumbled on something with
possibilities beyond their confused powers of application._
A gasp rustled through the chamber, followed by an even more awed
silence than had preceded the unbelievable, ultra-rapid action on the
telescreen. Gibson permitted himself a tight smile of satisfaction.
_Now my work really begins_, he reflected.
A few quick steps brought him to Dr. Haas, director of the project, just
before the less stunned observers surrounded that gentleman, babbling
questions.
"I'll start collecting the Number Three string of recorders," he
reported.
"All right, Arnold," agreed Haas. "Tell the others to get their ships
out too. I'll be busy here."
_Not half as busy as you will be in about a day_, thought Gibson,
heading for the spaceship berths.
  *  *  *  *  *
He had arranged to be assigned the recording machines drifting in space
at the greatest distance from the command ship. The others would assume
that he needed more time to locate and retrieve the apparatus--which
would give him a head start toward Alpha Centauri.
His ship was not large, but it was powerful and versatile to cope with
any emergency that may have been encountered during the dangerous tests.
Gibson watched his instruments carefully for signs of pursuit until he
had put a few million miles between himself and the command ship. Then
he eased his craft into subspace drive and relaxed his vigilance.
He returned to normal space many "days" later in the vicinity of Alpha
Centauri. They may have attempted to follow him for all he knew, but it
hardly mattered by then. He broadcast the recognition signal he had been
given to memorize long ago, when he had volunteered his services to the
new states. Then he headed for the capital planet, Nessus. Long before
reaching it, he acquired a lowering escort of warcraft, but he was
permitted to land.
"Well, well, it's young Gibson!" the Chairman of Nessus greeted him,
after the newcomer had passed through the exhaustive screening designed
to protect the elaborate underground headquarters. "I trust you have
news for us, my boy. Watch outside the door, Colonel!"
One of the ostentatiously armed guards stepped outside and closed the
door as Gibson greeted the obese man sitting across the button-studded
expanse of desk. The scientist was under no illusion as to the vagueness
of the title "Chairman." He was facing the absolute power of the
Centaurian planets--which, in a few months' time, would be the same as
saying the ruler of all the human race in both systems. Gibson's file
must have been available on the Chairman's desk telescreen within
minutes of the reception of his recognition signal. He felt a thrill of
admiration for the efficiency of the new states and their system of
government.
He made it his business to report briefly and accurately, trusting that
the plain facts of his feat would attract suitable recognition. They
did. Chairman Diamond's sharp blue eyes glinted out of the fat mask of
his features.
"Well done, my boy!" he grunted, with a joviality he did not bother
trying to make sound overly sincere. "So _they_ have it! You must see
our men immediately, and point out where they have gone wrong. You may
leave it to me to decide _who_ has gone wrong!"
  *  *  *  *  *
Arnold Gibson shivered involuntarily before reminding himself that _he_
had seen the correct answer proved before his eyes. He had stood there
and watched--more, he had worked with them all his adult life--and he
was the last whom the muddled fools would have suspected.
The officer outside the door, Colonel Korman, was recalled and given
orders to escort Gibson to the secret state laboratories. He glanced
briefly at the scientist when they had been let out through the
complicated system of safeguards.
"We have to go to the second moon," he said expressionlessly. "Better
sleep all you can on the way. Once you're there, the Chairman will be
impatient for results!"
Gibson was glad, after they had landed on the satellite, that he had
taken the advice. He was led from one underground lab to another, to
compare Centaurian developments with Solarian. Finally, Colonel Korman
appeared to extricate him, giving curt answers to such researchers as
still had questions.
"Whew! Glad you got me out!" Gibson thanked him. "They've been picking
my brain for two days straight!"
"I hope you can stay awake," retorted Korman with no outward sign of
sympathy. "If you think you can't, say so now. I'll have them give you
another shot. The Chairman is calling on the telescreen."
Gibson straightened.
_Jealous snob!_ he thought. _Typical military fathead, and he knows I
amount to more than any little colonel now. I was smart enough to fool
all the so-called brains of the Solar System._
"I'll stay awake," he said shortly.
Chairman Diamond's shiny features appeared on the screen soon after
Korman reported his charge ready.
"Speak freely," he ordered Gibson. "This beam is so tight and scrambled
that no prying jackass could even tell that it is communication. Have
you set us straight?"
"Yes, Your Excellency," replied Gibson. "I merely pointed out which of
several methods the Solarians got to yield results. Your--our scientists
were working on all possibilities, so it would have been only a matter
of time."
"Which you have saved us," said Chairman Diamond. His ice-blue eyes
glinted again. "I wish I could have seen the faces of Haas and
Co-ordinator Evora, and the rest. You fooled them completely!"
Gibson glowed at the rare praise.
"I dislike bragging, Your Excellency," he said, "but they _are_ fools. I
might very well have found the answer without them, once they had
collected the data. My success shows what intelligence, well-directed
after the manner of the new states of Centauri, can accomplish against
inefficiency."
The Chairman's expression, masked by the fat of his face, nevertheless
approached a smile.
"So you would say that you--one of _our_ sympathizers--were actually the
most intelligent worker _they_ had?"
_He'll have his little joke_, thought Gibson, _and I'll let him put it
over. Then, even that sour colonel will laugh with us, and the Chairman
will hint about what post I'll get as a reward. I wouldn't mind being in
charge--old Haas' opposite number at this end._
"I think I might indeed be permitted to boast of that much ability, Your
Excellency," he answered, putting on what he hoped was an expectant
smile. "Although, considering the Solarians, that is not saying much."
The little joke did not develop precisely as anticipated.
"Unfortunately," Chairman Diamond said, maintaining his smile
throughout, "wisdom should never be confused with intelligence."
  *  *  *  *  *
Gibson waited, feeling his own smile stiffen as he wondered what could
be going wrong. Surely, they could not doubt _his_ loyalty! A hasty
glance at Colonel Korman revealed no expression on the military facade
affected by that gentleman.
"For if wisdom _were_ completely synonymous with intelligence," the
obese Chairman continued, relishing his exposition, "you would be a
rival to myself, and consequently would be--disposed of--anyway!"
Such a tingle shot up Gibson's spine that he was sure he must have
jumped.
"_Anyway?_" he repeated huskily. His mouth suddenly seemed dry.
Chairman Diamond smiled out of the telescreen, so broadly that Gibson
was unpleasantly affected by the sight of his small, gleaming, white
teeth.
"Put it this way," he suggested suavely. "Your highly trained mind
observed, correlated, and memorized the most intricate data and
mathematics, meanwhile guiding your social relations with your former
colleagues so as to remain unsuspected while stealing their most
cherished secret. Such a feat demonstrates ability and intelligence."
Gibson tried to lick his lips, and could not, despite the seeming
fairness of the words. He sensed a pulsing undercurrent of cruelty and
cynicism.
"On the other hand," the mellow voice flowed on, "having received the
information, being able to use it effectively now without you, and
knowing that you betrayed _once_--I shall simply discard you like an old
message blank. _That_ is an act of wisdom.
"Had you chosen your course more wisely," he added, "your position might
be stronger."
By the time Arnold Gibson regained his voice, the Centaurian autocrat
was already giving instructions to Colonel Korman. The scientist strove
to interrupt, to attract the ruler's attention even momentarily.
Neither paid him any heed, until he shouted and tried frenziedly to
shove the soldier from in front of the telescreen. Korman backhanded him
across the throat without looking around, with such force that Gibson
staggered back and fell.
He lay, half-choking, grasping his throat with both hands until he could
breathe. The colonel continued discussing his extinction without
emotion.
"... so if Your Excellency agrees, I would prefer taking him back to
Nessus first, for the sake of the morale factor here. Some of them are
so addled now at having been caught chasing up wrong alleys that they
can hardly work."
Apparently the Chairman agreed, for the screen was blank when the
colonel reached down and hauled Gibson to his feet.
"Now, listen to me carefully!" he said, emphasizing his order with a
ringing slap across Gibson's face. "I shall walk behind you with my
blaster drawn. If you make a false move, I shall not kill you."
Gibson stared at him, holding his bleeding mouth.
"It will be much worse," Korman went on woodenly. "Imagine what it will
be like to have both feet charred to the bone. You would have to crawl
the rest of the way to the ship; _I_ certainly would not consider
carrying you!"
In a nightmarish daze, Gibson obeyed the cold directions, and walked
slowly along the underground corridors of the Centaurian research
laboratories. He prayed desperately that someone--anyone--might come
along. _Anybody_ who could possibly be used to create a diversion, or to
be pushed into Korman and his deadly blaster.
The halls remained deserted, possibly by arrangement.
_Maybe I'd better wait till we reach his ship_, Gibson thought. _I ought
to be able to figure a way before we reach Nessus. I had the brains to
fool Haas and ..._
He winced, recalling Chairman Diamond's theory of the difference between
intelligence and wisdom.
_The obscene swine!_ he screamed silently.
Colonel Korman grunted warningly, and Gibson took the indicated turn.
They entered the spaceship from an underground chamber, and Gibson
learned the reason for his executioner's assurance when the latter
chained him to one of the pneumatic acceleration seats. The chain was
fragile in appearance, but he knew he would not be free to move until
Korman so desired.
_More of their insane brand of cleverness!_ he reflected. _That's the
sort of thing they do succeed in thinking of. They're all crazy! Why did
I ever ..._
But he shrank from the question he feared to answer. To drag out into
the open his petty, selfish reasons, shorn of the tinsel glamor of
so-called "service" and "progress," would be too painful.
  *  *  *  *  *
After the first series of accelerations, he roused himself from his
beaten stupor enough to note that Korman was taking a strange course for
reaching Nessus. Then, entirely too close to the planet and its
satellites to ensure accuracy, the colonel put the ship into subspace
drive.
Korman leaned back at the conclusion of the brief activity on his
control board, and met Gibson's pop-eyed stare.
"Interesting, the things worth knowing," he commented. "How to make a
weapon, for instance, or whether your enemy has it yet."
He almost smiled at his prisoner's expression.
"Or even better: knowing exactly how far your enemy has progressed and
how fast he can continue, whether to stop him immediately or whether you
can remain a step ahead."
"B-but--if both sides are irresistible ..." Gibson stammered.
Korman examined him contemptuously.
"No irresistible weapon exists, or ever will!" he declared. "Only an
irresistible _process_--the transmission of secrets! You are living
proof that no safeguards can defend against _that_."
He savored Gibson's silent discomfort.
"I am sure you know how far and how fast the Centaurian scientists will
go, Gibson, since I guided you to every laboratory in that plant. Your
memory may require some painful jogging when we reach the Solar System;
_but remember you shall_!"
"But you--you were ordered to ..."
"You didn't think I was a Centaurian, did you?" sneered Korman. "After I
just explained to you _what_ is really irresistible?"
THE ENDTHE HAPPY UNFORTUNATE
By ROBERT SILVERBERG
Dekker, back from space, found great physical changes in
the people of Earth; changes that would have horrified
him five years before. But now, he wanted to be like the
rest--even if he had to lose an eye and both ears to do it.
Rolf Dekker stared incredulously at the slim, handsome young Earther who
was approaching the steps of Rolf's tumbling-down Spacertown shack.
_He's got no ears_, Rolf noted in unbelief. After five years in space,
Rolf had come home to a strangely-altered world, and he found it hard to
accept.
Another Earther appeared. This one was about the same size, and gave the
same impression of fragility. This one had ears, all right--and a pair
of gleaming, two-inch horns on his forehead as well. _I'll be eternally
roasted_, Rolf thought. _Now I've seen everything._
Both Earthers were dressed in neat, gold-inlaid green tunics, costumes
which looked terribly out of place amid the filth of Spacertown, and
their hair was dyed a light green to match.
He had been scrutinizing them for several moments before they became
aware of him. They both spotted him at once and the one with no ears
turned to his companion and whispered something. Rolf, leaning forward,
strained to hear.
"... beautiful, isn't he? That's the biggest one I've seen!"
"Come over here, won't you?" the horned one called, in a soft, gentle
voice which contrasted oddly with the raucous bellowing Rolf had been
accustomed to hearing in space. "We'd like to talk to you."
Just then Kanaday emerged from the door of the shack and limped down
to the staircase.
[Illustration: The doctor refused to change Dekker, so Dekker was going
to change the doctor.]
"Hey, Rolf!" he called. "Leave those things alone!"
"Let me find out what they want first, huh?"
"Can't be any good, whatever it is," Kanaday growled. "Tell them to get
out of here before I throw them back to wherever they came from. And
make it fast."
  *  *  *  *  *
The two Earthers looked at each other uneasily. Rolf walked toward them.
"He doesn't like Earthers, that's all," Rolf explained. "But he won't do
anything but yell."
Kanaday spat in disgust, turned, and limped back inside the shack.
"I didn't know you were wearing horns," Rolf said.
The Earther flushed. "New style," he said. "Very expensive."
"Oh," Rolf said. "I'm new here; I just got back. Five years in space.
When I left you people looked all alike. Now you wear horns."
"It's the new trend," said the earless one. "We're Individs. When you
left the Conforms were in power, style-wise. But the new surgeons can do
almost anything, you see."
The shadow of a frown crossed Rolf's face. "Anything?"
"Almost. They can't transform an Earther into a Spacer, and they don't
think they ever will."
"Or vice versa?" Rolf asked.
They sniggered. "What Spacer would want to become an Earther? Who would
give up that life, out in the stars?"
Rolf said nothing. He kicked at the heap of litter in the filthy street.
_What spacer indeed?_ he thought. He suddenly realized that the two
little Earthers were staring up at him as if he were some sort of beast.
He probably weighed as much as both of them, he knew, and at six-four he
was better than a foot taller. They looked like children next to him,
like toys. The savage blast of acceleration would snap their flimsy
bodies like toothpicks.
"What places have you been to?" the earless one asked.
"Two years on Mars, one on Venus, one in the Belt, one on Neptune," Rolf
recited. "I didn't like Neptune. It was best in the Belt; just our one
ship, prospecting. We made a pile on Ceres--enough to buy out. I shot
half of it on Neptune. Still have plenty left, but I don't know what I
can do with it." He didn't add that he had come home puzzled, wondering
why he was a Spacer instead of an Earther, condemned to live in filthy
Spacertown when Yawk was just across the river.
They were looking at his shabby clothes, at the dirty brownstone hovel
he lived in--an antique of a house four or five centuries old.
"You mean you're rich?" the Earther said.
"Sure," Rolf said. "Every Spacer is. So what? What can I spend it on? My
money's banked on Mars and Venus. Thanks to the law I can't legally get
it to Earth. So I live in Spacertown."
"Have you ever seen an Earther city?" the earless one asked, looking
around at the quiet streets of Spacertown with big powerful men sitting
idly in front of every house.
"I used to live in Yawk," Rolf said. "My grandmother was an Earther; she
brought me up there. I haven't been back there since I left for space."
_They forced me out of Yawk_, he thought. _I'm not part of their
species. Not one of them._
  *  *  *  *  *
The two Earthers exchanged glances.
"Can we interest you in a suggestion?" They drew in their breath as if
they expected to be knocked sprawling.
Kanaday appeared at the door of the shack again.
"Rolf. Hey! You turning into an Earther? Get rid of them two cuties
before there's trouble."
Rolf turned and saw a little knot of Spacers standing on the other side
of the street, watching him with curiosity. He glared at them.
"I'll do whatever I damn well please," he shouted across.
He turned back to the two Earthers. "Now, what is it you want?"
"I'm giving a party next week," the earless one said. "I'd like you to
come. We'd like to get the Spacer slant on life."
"Party?" Rolf repeated. "You mean, dancing, and games, and stuff like
that?"
"You'll enjoy it," the Earther said coaxingly. "And we'd all love to
have a real Spacer there."
"When is it?"
"A week."
"I have ten days left of my leave. All right," he said. "I'll come."
He accepted the Earther's card, looked at it mechanically, saw the
name--Kal Quinton--and pocketed it. "Sure," he said. "I'll be there."
The Earthers moved toward their little jetcar, smiling gratefully. As
Rolf crossed the street, the other Spacers greeted him with cold,
puzzled stares.
  *  *  *  *  *
Kanaday was almost as tall as Rolf, and even uglier. Rolf's eyebrows
were bold and heavy; Kanaday's, thick, contorted, bushy clumps of hair.
Kanaday's nose had been broken long before in some barroom brawl; his
cheekbones bulged; his face was strong and hard. More important, his
left foot was twisted and gnarled beyond hope of redemption by the most
skillful surgeon. He had been crippled in a jet explosion three years
before, and was of no use to the Spacelines any more. They had pensioned
him off. Part of the deal was the dilapidated old house in Spacertown
which he operated as a boarding-house for transient Spacers.
"What do you want to do that for?" Kanaday asked. "Haven't those
Earthers pushed you around enough, so you have to go dance at one of
their wild parties?"
"Leave me alone," Rolf muttered.
"You like this filth you live in? Spacertown is just a ghetto, that's
all. The Earthers have pushed you right into the muck. You're not even
a human being to them--just some sort of trained ape. And now you're
going to go and entertain them. I thought you had brains, Rolf!"
"Shut up!" He dashed his glass against the table; it bounced off and
dropped to the floor, where it shattered.
Kanaday's girl Laney entered the room at the sound of the crash. She was
tall and powerful-looking, with straight black hair and the strong
cheekbones that characterized the Spacers. Immediately she stooped and
began shoveling up the broken glass.
"That wasn't smart, Rolf," she said. "That'll cost you half a credit.
Wasn't worth it, was it?"
Rolf laid the coin on the edge of the table. "Tell your pal to shut up,
then. If he doesn't stop icing me I'll fix his other foot for him and
you can buy him a dolly."
She looked from one to the other. "What's bothering you two now?"
"A couple of Earthers were here this morning," Kanaday said. "Slumming.
They took a fancy to our young friend here and invited him to one of
their parties. He accepted."
"He _what_? Don't go, Rolf. You're crazy to go."
"Why am I crazy?" He tried to control his voice. "Why should we keep
ourselves apart from the Earthers? Why shouldn't the two races get
together?"
  *  *  *  *  *
She put down her tray and sat next to him. "They're more than two
races," she said patiently. "Earther and Spacer are two different
species, Rolf. Carefully, genetically separated. They're small and weak,
we're big and powerful. You've been bred for going to space; they're the
castoffs, the ones who were too weak to go. The line between the two
groups is too strong to break."
"And they treat us like dirt--like animals," Kanaday said. "But
_they're_ the dirt. They were the ones who couldn't make it."
"Don't go to the party," Laney said. "They just want to make fun of you.
Look at the big ape, they'll say."
Rolf stood up. "You don't understand. Neither of you does. I'm part
Earther," Rolf said. "My grandmother on my mother's side. She raised me
as an Earther. She wanted me to be an Earther. But I kept getting bigger
and uglier all the time. She took me to a plastic surgeon once, figuring
he could make me look like an Earther. He was a little man; I don't know
what he looked like to start with but some other surgeon had made him
clean-cut and straight-nosed and thin-lipped like all the other
Earthers. I was bigger than he was--twice as big, and I was only
fifteen. He looked at me and felt my bones and measured me. 'Healthy
little ape'--those were the words he used. He told my grandmother I'd
get bigger and bigger, that no amount of surgery could make me small and
handsome, that I was fit only for space and didn't belong in Yawk. So I
left for space the next morning."
"I see," Laney said quietly.
"I didn't say good-bye. I just left. There was no place for me in Yawk;
I couldn't pass myself off as an Earther any more. But I'd like to go
back and see what the old life was like, now that I know what it's like
to be on the other side for a while."
"It'll hurt when you find out, Rolf."
"I'll take that chance. But I want to go. Maybe my grandmother'll be
there. The surgeons made her young and pretty again every few years; she
looked like my sister when I left."
Laney nodded her head. "There's no point arguing with him, Kanaday. He
has to go back there and find out, so let him alone."
Rolf smiled. "Thanks for understanding." He took out Quinton's card and
turned it over and over in his hand.
  *  *  *  *  *
Rolf went to Yawk on foot, dressed in his best clothes, with his face as
clean as it had been in some years. Spacertown was just across the river
from Yawk, and the bridges spanning the river were bright and gleaming
in the mid-afternoon sun.
The bombs had landed on Yawk during the long-forgotten war, but somehow
they had spared the sprawling borough across the river. And so Yawk had
been completely rebuilt, once the radioactivity had been purged from the
land, while what was now Spacertown consisted mostly of buildings that
dated back to the Twentieth Century.
Yawk had been the world's greatest seaport; now it was the world's
greatest spaceport. The sky was thick with incoming and outgoing liners.
The passengers on the ship usually stayed at Yawk, which had become an
even greater metropolis than it had been before the Bomb. The crew
crossed the river to Spacertown, where they could find their own kind.
Yawk and Spacertown were like two separate planets. There were three
bridges spanning the river, but most of the time they went unused,
except by spacemen going back home or by spacemen going to the spaceport
for embarkation. There was no regular transportation between the two
cities; to get from Spacertown to Yawk, you could borrow a jetcar or you
could walk. Rolf walked.
He enjoyed the trip. _I'm going back home_, he thought as he paced along
the gleaming arc of the bridge, dressed in his Sunday best. He
remembered the days of his own childhood, his parentless childhood. His
earliest memory was of a fight at the age of six or so. He had stood off
what seemed like half the neighborhood, ending the battle by picking up
an older bully, much feared by everyone, and heaving him over a fence.
When he told his grandmother about the way he had won the fight she
cried for an hour, and never told him why. But they had never picked on
him again, though he knew the other boys had jeered at him behind his
back as he grew bigger and bigger over the years. "Ape," they called
him. "Ape."
But never to his face.
He approached the Yawk end of the bridge. A guard was waiting there--an
Earther guard, small and frail, but with a sturdy-looking blaster at his
hip.
"Going back, Spacer?"
Rolf started. How did the guard know? And then he realized that all the
guard meant was, are you going back to your ship?
"No. No, I'm going to a party. Kal Quinton's house."
"Tell me another, Spacer." The guard's voice was light and derisive. A
swift poke in the ribs would break him in half, Rolf thought.
"I'm serious. Quinton invited me. Here's his card."
"If this is a joke it'll mean trouble. But go ahead; I'll take your word
for it."
Rolf marched on past the guard, almost nonchalantly. He looked at the
address on the card. _12406 Kenman Road._ He rooted around in his fading
memory of Yawk, but he found the details had blurred under the impact of
five years of Mars and Venus and the Belt and Neptune. He did not know
where Kenman Road was.
The glowing street signs were not much help either. One said 287th
Street and the other said 72nd Avenue. Kenman Road might be anywhere.
He walked on a block or two. The streets were antiseptically clean, and
he had the feeling that his boots, which had lately trod in Spacertown,
were leaving dirtmarks along the street. He did not look back to see.
  *  *  *  *  *
He looked at his wristchron. It was getting late, and Kenman Road might
be anywhere. He turned into a busy thoroughfare, conscious that he was
attracting attention. The streets here were crowded with little people
who barely reached his chest; they were all about the same height, and
most of them looked alike. A few had had radical surgical alterations,
and every one of these was different. One had a unicorn-like horn;
another, an extra eye which cunningly resembled his real ones. The
Earthers were looking at him furtively, as they would at a tiger or an
elephant strolling down a main street.
"Where are you going, Spacer?" said a voice from the middle of the
street.
Rolf's first impulse was to snarl out a curse and keep moving, but he
realized that the question was a good one and one whose answer he was
trying to find out for himself. He turned.
Another policeman stood on the edge of the walkway. "Are you lost?" The
policeman was short and delicate-looking.
Rolf produced his card.
The policeman studied it. "What business do you have with Quinton?"
"Just tell me how to get there," Rolf said. "I'm in a hurry."
The policeman backed up a step. "All right, take it easy." He pointed to
a kiosk. "Take the subcar here. There's a stop at Kenman Road. You can
find your way from there."
"I'd rather walk it," Rolf said. He did not want to have to stand the
strain of riding in a subcar with a bunch of curious staring Earthers.
"Fine with me," the policeman said. "It's about two hundred blocks to
the north. Got a good pair of legs?"
"Never mind," Rolf said. "I'll take the subcar."
  *  *  *  *  *
Kenman Road was a quiet little street in an expensive-looking end of
Yawk. 12406 was a towering building which completely overshadowed
everything else on the street. As Rolf entered the door, a perfumed
little Earther with a flashing diamond where his left eye should have
been and a skin stained bright purple appeared from nowhere.
"We've been waiting for you. Come on; Kal will be delighted that you're
here."
The elevator zoomed up so quickly that Rolf thought for a moment that he
was back in space. But it stopped suddenly at the 62nd floor, and, as
the door swung open, the sounds of wild revelry drifted down the hall.
Rolf had a brief moment of doubt when he pictured Laney and Kanaday at
this very moment, playing cards in their mouldering hovel while he
walked down this plastiline corridor back into a world he had left
behind.
Quinton came out into the hall to greet him. Rolf recognized him by the
missing ears; his skin was now a subdued blue to go with his orange
robe.
"I'm so glad you came," the little Earther bubbled. "Come on in and I'll
introduce you to everyone."
The door opened photoelectrically as they approached. Quinton seized him
by the hand and dragged him in. There was the sound of laughter and of
shouting. As he entered it all stopped, suddenly, as if it had been shut
off. Rolf stared at them quizzically from under his lowering brows, and
they looked at him with ill-concealed curiosity.
They seemed divided into two groups. Clustered at one end of the long
hall was a group of Earthers who seemed completely identical, all with
the same features, looking like so many dolls in a row. These were the
Earthers he remembered, the ones whom the plastic surgeons had hacked at
and hewn until they all conformed to the prevailing concept of beauty.
Then at the other end was a different group. They were all different.
Some had glittering jewels set in their foreheads, others had no lips,
no hair, extra eyes, three nostrils. They were a weird and frightening
group, highest product of the plastic surgeon's art.
Both groups were staring silently at Rolf.
"Friends, this is Rolf--Rolf--"
"Dekker," Rolf said after a pause. He had almost forgotten his own last
name.
"Rolf Dekker, just back from outer space. I've invited him to join us
tonight. I think you'll enjoy meeting him."
The stony silence slowly dissolved into murmurs of polite conversation
as the party-goers adjusted to the presence of the newcomer. They
seemed to be discussing the matter earnestly among themselves, as if
Quinton had done something unheard-of by bringing a Spacer into an
Earther party.
A tall girl with blonde hair drifted up to him.
"Ah. Jonne," Quinton said. He turned to Rolf. "This is Jonne. She asked
to be your companion at the party. She's very interested in space and
things connected with it."
Things connected with it, Rolf thought. Meaning me. He looked at her.
She was as tall an Earther as he had yet seen, and probably suffered for
it when there were no Spacers around. Furthermore, he suspected, her
height was accentuated for the evening by special shoes. She was not of
the Individ persuasion, because her face was well-shaped, with smooth,
even features, with no individualist distortion. Her skin was unstained.
She wore a clinging off-the-breast tunic. Quite a dish, Rolf decided. He
began to see that he might enjoy this party.
  *  *  *  *  *
The other guests began to approach timidly, now that the initial shock
of his presence had worn off. They asked silly little questions about
space--questions which showed that they had only a superficial interest
in him and were treating him as a sort of talking dog. He answered as
many as he could, looking down at their little painted faces with
concealed contempt.
_They think as little of me as I do of them._ The thought hit him
suddenly and his broad face creased in a smile at the irony. Then the
music started.
  *  *  *  *  *
The knot of Earthers slowly broke up and drifted away to dance. He
looked at Jonne, who had stood patiently at his side through all this.
"I don't dance," he said. "I never learned how." He watched the other
couples moving gracefully around the floor, looking for all the world
like an assemblage of puppets. He stared in the dim light, watching the
couples clinging to each other as they rocked through the motions of the
dance. He stood against the wall, wearing his ugliness like a shield. He
saw the great gulf which separated him from the Earthers spreading
before him, as he watched the dancers and the gay chatter and the empty
badinage and the furtive hand-holding, and everything else from which he
was cut off. The bizarre Individs were dancing together--he noticed one
man putting an extra arm to full advantage--and the almost identical
Conforms had formed their own group again. Rolf wondered how they told
each other apart when they all looked alike.
"Come on," Jonne said. "I'll show you how to dance." He turned to look
at her, with her glossy blonde hair and even features. She smiled
prettily, revealing white teeth. _Probably newly purchased?_ Rolf
wondered.
"Actually I do know how to dance," Rolf said. "But I do it so badly--"
"That doesn't matter," she said gaily. "Come on."
She took his arm. Maybe she doesn't think I look like an ape, he
thought. She doesn't treat me the way the others do. But why am I so
ugly, and why is she so pretty?
He looked at her and she looked at him, and he felt her glance on his
stubbly face with its ferocious teeth and burning yellowish eyes. He
didn't want her to see him at all; he wished he had no face.
He folded her in his arms, feeling her warmth radiate through him. She
was very tall, he realized, almost as tall as a Spacer woman--but with
none of the harsh ruggedness of the women of Spacertown. They danced,
she well, he clumsily. When the music stopped she guided him to the
entrance of a veranda.
They walked outside into the cool night air. The lights of the city
obscured most of the stars, but a few still showed, and the moon hung
high above Yawk. He could dimly make out the lights of Spacertown across
the river, and he thought again of Laney and Kanaday and wished Kanaday
could see him now with this beautiful Earther next to him.
"You must get lonely in space," she said after a while.
"I do," he said, trying to keep his voice gentle. "But it's where I
belong. I'm bred for it."
She nodded. "Yes. And any of those so-called men inside would give ten
years of his life to be able to go to space. But yet you say it's
lonely."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Those long rides through the night," he said. "They get you down. You
want to be back among people. So you come back. You come back. And what
do you come back to?"
"I know," she said softly. "I've seen Spacertown."
"Why must it be that way?" he demanded. "Why are Spacers so lucky and
so wretched all at once?"
"Let's not talk about it now," she said.
I'd like to kiss her, he thought. But my face is rough, and I'm rough
and ugly, and she'd push me away. I remember the pretty little Earther
girls who ran laughing away from me when I was thirteen and fourteen,
before I went to space.
"You don't have to be lonely," she said. One of her perfect eyebrows
lifted just a little. "Maybe someday you'll find someone who cares,
Rolf. Someday, maybe."
"Yeah," he said. "Someday, maybe." But he knew it was all wrong. Could
he bring this girl to Spacertown with him? No; she must be merely
playing a game, looking for an evening's diversion. Something new: make
love to a Spacer.
They fell silent and he watched her again, and she watched him. He heard
her breath rising and falling evenly, not at all like his own thick
gasps. After a while he stepped close to her, put his arm around her,
tilted her head into the crook of his elbow, bent, and kissed her.
As he did it, he saw he was botching it just like everything else. He
had come too close, and his heavy boot was pressing on the tip of her
shoe; and he had not quite landed square on her lips. But still, he was
close to her. He was reluctant to break it up, but he felt she was only
half-responding, not giving anything of herself while he had given all.
He drew back a step.
She did not have time to hide the expression of distaste that
involuntarily crossed her face. He watched the expression on her face as
she realized the kiss was over. He watched her silently.
"Someday, maybe," he said. She stared at him, not hiding the fear that
was starting to grow on her face.
He felt a cold chill deep in his stomach, and it grew until it passed
through his throat and into his head.
"Yeah," he said. "Someday, maybe. But not you. Not anyone who's just
playing games. That's all--you want something to tell your friends
about, that's why you volunteered for tonight's assignment. It's all you
can do to keep from laughing at me, but you're sticking to it. I don't
want any of it, hear me? Get away."
She stepped back a pace. "You ugly, clumsy clown. You ape!" Tears began
to spoil the flawless mask of her face. Blinded with anger, he grabbed
roughly for her arm, but she broke away and dashed back inside.
She was trying to collect me, he thought. Her hobby: interesting dates.
She wanted to add me to her collection. An Experience. Calmly he walked
to the end of the veranda and stared off into the night, choking his
rage. He watched the moon making its dead ride across the sky, and
stared at the sprinkling of stars. The night was empty and cold, he
thought, finally. But not more so than I.
  *  *  *  *  *
He turned and looked back through the half-opened window. He saw a girl
who looked almost like her, but was not tall enough and wore a different
dress. Then he spotted her. She was dancing with one of the Conforms, a
frail-looking man a few inches shorter than she, with regular, handsome
features. She laughed at some sly joke, and he laughed with her.
Rolf watched the moon for a moment more, thinking of Laney's warning.
_They just want to make fun of you. Look at the big ape, they'll say._
He knew he had to get out of there immediately. He was a Spacer, and
they were Earthers, and he scorned them for being contemptuous little
dolls, and they laughed at him for being a hulking ape. He was not a
member of their species; he was not part of their world.
He went inside. Kal Quinton came rushing up to him.
"I'm going," Rolf said.
"What? You don't mean that," the little man said. "Why, the party's
scarcely gotten under way, and there are dozens of people who want to
meet you. And you'll miss the big show if you don't stay."
"I've already seen the big show," Rolf told him. "I want out. Now."
"You can't leave now," Quinton said. Rolf thought he saw tears in the
corners of the little man's eyes. "Please don't leave. I've told
everyone you'd be here--you'll disgrace me."
"What do I care? Let me out of here." Rolf started to move toward the
door. Quinton attempted to push him back.
"Just a minute, Rolf. Please!"
"I have to get out," he said. He knocked Quinton out of his way with a
backhand swipe of his arm and dashed down the hall frantically, looking
for the elevator.
  *  *  *  *  *
Laney and Kanaday were sitting up waiting for him when he got back,
early in the morning. He slung himself into a pneumochair and unsealed
his boots, releasing his cramped, tired feet.
"Well," Laney asked. "How was the party?"
"You have fun among the Earthers, Rolf?"
He said nothing.
"It couldn't have been that bad," Laney said.
Rolf looked up at her. "I'm leaving space. I'm going to go to a surgeon
and have him turn me into an Earther. I hate this filthy life!"
"He's drunk," Kanaday said.
"No, I'm not drunk," Rolf retorted. "I don't want to be an ape any
more."
"Is that what you are? If you're an ape, what are they to you? Monkeys?"
Kanaday laughed harshly.
"Are they really so wonderful?" Laney asked. "Does the life appeal to
you so much that you'll give up space for it? Do you admire the Earthers
so much?"
  *  *  *  *  *
_She's got me_, Rolf thought. I hate Spacertown, but will I like Yawk
any better? Do I really want to become one of those little puppets? But
there's nothing left in space for me. At least the Earthers are happy.
_I wish she wouldn't look at me that way._ "Leave me alone," he snarled.
"I'll do whatever I want to do." Laney was staring at him, trying to
poke behind his mask of anger. He looked at her wide shoulders, her
muscular frame, her unbeautiful hair and rugged face, and compared it
with Jonne's clinging grace, her flowing gold hair.
He picked up his boots and stumped up to bed.
  *  *  *  *  *
The surgeon's name was Goldring, and he was a wiry, intense man who had
prevailed on one of his colleagues to give him a tiny slit of a mouth.
He sat behind a shining plastiline desk, waiting patiently until Rolf
finished talking.
"It can't be done," he said at last. "Plastic surgeons can do almost
anything, but I can't turn you into an Earther. It's not just a matter
of chopping eight or ten inches out of your legs; I'd have to alter your
entire bone structure or you'd be a hideous misproportioned monstrosity.
And it can't be done. I can't build you a whole new body from scratch,
and if I could do it you wouldn't be able to afford it."
Rolf stamped his foot impatiently. "You're the third surgeon who's given
me the same line. What is this--a conspiracy? I see what you can do. If
you can graft a third arm onto somebody, you can turn me into an
Earther."
"Please, Mr. Dekker. I've told you I can't. But I don't understand why
you want such a change. Hardly a week goes by without some Yawk boy
coming to me and asking to be turned into a Spacer, and I have to refuse
him for the same reasons I'm refusing you! That's the usual course of
events--the romantic Earther boy wanting to go to space, and not being
able to."
An idea hit Rolf. "Was one of them Kal Quinton?"
"I'm sorry, Mr. Dekker. I just can't divulge any such information."
Rolf shot his arm across the desk and grasped the surgeon by the throat.
"Answer me!"
"Yes," the surgeon gasped. "Quinton asked me for such an operation.
Almost everyone wants one."
"And you can't do it?" Rolf asked.
"Of course not. I've told you: the amount of work needed to turn Earther
into Spacer or Spacer into Earther is inconceivable. It'll never be
done."
"I guess that's definite, then," Rolf said, slumping a little in
disappointment. "But there's nothing to prevent you from giving me a new
face--from taking away this face and replacing it with something people
can look at without shuddering."
"I don't understand you, Mr. Dekker," the surgeon said.
"I know that! Can't you see it--I'm _ugly_! Why? Why should I look this
way?"
"Please calm down, Mr. Dekker. You don't seem to realize that you're a
perfectly normal-looking Spacer. _You were bred to look this way._ It's
your genetic heritage. Space is not a thing for everyone; only men with
extraordinary bone structure can withstand acceleration. The first men
were carefully selected and bred. You see the result of five centuries
of this sort of breeding. The sturdy, heavy-boned Spacers--you, Mr.
Dekker, and your friends--are the only ones who are fit to travel in
space. The others, the weaklings like myself, the little people, resort
to plastic surgery to compensate for their deficiency. For a while the
trend was to have everyone conform to a certain standard of beauty; if
we couldn't be strong, we could at least be handsome. Lately a new
theory of individualism has sprung up, and now we strive for original
forms in our bodies. This is all because size and strength has been bred
out of us and given to you."
"I know all this," Rolf said. "Why can't you--"
"Why can't I peel away your natural face and make you look like an
Earther? There's no reason why; it would be a simple operation. But who
would you fool? Why can't you be grateful for what you are? You can go
to Mars, while we can merely look at it. If I gave you a new face, it
would cut you off from both sides. The Earthers would still know you
were a Spacer, and I'm sure the other Spacers would immediately cease to
associate with you."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Who are you to say? You're not supposed to pass judgment on whether an
operation should be performed, or you wouldn't pull out people's eyes
and stick diamonds in!"
"It's not that, Mr. Dekker." The surgeon folded and unfolded his hands
in impatience. "You must realize that you are what you are. Your
appearance is a social norm, and for acceptance in your social
environment you must continue to appear, well, perhaps, shall I say
apelike?"
It was as bad a word as the surgeon could have chosen.
"Ape! Ape, am I! I'll show you who's an ape!" Rolf yelled, all the
accumulated frustration of the last two days suddenly bursting loose. He
leaped up and overturned the desk. Dr. Goldring hastily jumped backwards
as the heavy desk crashed to the floor. A startled nurse dashed into the
office, saw the situation, and immediately ran out.
"Give me your instruments! I'll operate on myself!" He knocked Goldring
against the wall, pulled down a costly solidograph from the wall and
kicked it at him, and crashed through into the operating room, where he
began overturning tables and heaving chairs through glass shelves.
"I'll show you," he said. He cracked an instrument case and took out a
delicate knife with a near-microscopic edge. He bent it in half and
threw the crumpled wreckage away. Wildly he destroyed everything he
could, raging from one end of the room to the other, ripping down
furnishings, smashing, destroying, while Dr. Goldring stood at the door
and yelled for help.
It was not long in coming. An army of Earther policemen erupted into
the room and confronted him as he stood panting amid the wreckage. They
were all short men, but there must have been twenty of them.
"Don't shoot him," someone called. And then they advanced in a body.
He picked up the operating table and hurled it at them. Three policemen
crumpled under it, but the rest kept coming. He batted them away like
insects, but they surrounded him and piled on. For a few moments he
struggled under the load of fifteen small men, punching and kicking and
yelling. He burst loose for an instant, but two of them were clinging to
his legs and he hit the floor with a crash. They were on him
immediately, and he stopped struggling after a while.
  *  *  *  *  *
The next thing he knew he was lying sprawled on the floor of his room in
Spacertown, breathing dust out of the tattered carpet. He was a mass of
cuts and bruises, and he knew they must have given him quite a
going-over. He was sore from head to foot.
So they hadn't arrested him. No, of course not; no more than they would
arrest any wild animal who went berserk. They had just dumped him back
in the jungle. He tried to get up, but couldn't make it. Quite a
going-over it must have been. Nothing seemed broken, but everything was
slightly bent.
"Satisfied now?" said a voice from somewhere. It was a pleasant sound to
hear, a voice, and he let the mere noise of it soak into his mind. "Now
that you've proved to everyone that you really are just an ape?"
He twisted his neck around--slowly, because his neck was stiff and sore.
Laney was sitting on the edge of his bed with two suitcases next to her.
"It really wasn't necessary to run wild there," she said. "The Earthers
all knew you were just an animal anyway. You didn't have to prove it so
violently."
"Okay, Laney. Quit it."
"If you want me to. I just wanted to make sure you knew what had
happened. A gang of Earther cops brought you back a while ago and dumped
you here. They told me the story."
"Leave me alone."
"You've been telling everyone that all along, Rolf. Look where it got
you. A royal beating at the hands of a bunch of Earthers. Now that
they've thrown you out for the last time, has it filtered into your
mind that this is where you belong?"
"In Spacertown?"
"Only between trips. You belong in space, Rolf. No surgeon can make you
an Earther. The Earthers are dead, but they don't know it yet. All their
parties, their fancy clothes, their extra arms and missing ears--that
means they're decadent. They're finished. You're the one who's alive;
the whole universe is waiting for you to go out and step on its neck.
And instead you want to turn yourself into a green-skinned little
monkey! Why?"
  *  *  *  *  *
He pulled himself to a sitting position. "I don't know," he said. "I've
been all mixed up, I think." He felt his powerful arm. "I'm a Spacer."
Suddenly he glanced at her. "What are the suitcases for?" he said.
"I'm moving in," Laney said. "I need a place to sleep."
"What's the matter with Kanaday? Did he get tired of listening to you
preaching? He's my friend, Laney; I'm not going to do him dirt."
"He's dead, Rolf. When the Earther cops came here to bring you back, and
he saw what they did to you, his hatred overflowed. He always hated
Earthers, and he hated them even more for the way you were being
tricked into thinking they were worth anything. He got hold of one of
those cops and just about twisted him into two pieces. They blasted
him."
Rolf was silent. He let his head sink down on his knees.
"So I moved down here. It's lonely upstairs now. Come on; I'll help you
get up."
She walked toward him, hooked her hand under his arm, and half-dragged,
half-pushed him to his feet. Her touch was firm, and there was no
denying the strength behind her.
"I have to get fixed up," he said abruptly. "My leave's up in two days.
I have to get out of here. We're shipping for Pluto."
  *  *  *  *  *
He rocked unsteadily on his feet. "It'll really get lonely here then,"
he said.
"Are you really going to go? Or are you going to find some jack-surgeon
who'll make your face pretty for a few dirty credits?"
"Stop it. I mean it. I'm going. I'll be gone a year on this signup. By
then I'll have enough cash piled up on various planets to be a rich man.
I'll get it all together and get a mansion on Venus, and have Greenie
slaves."
It was getting toward noon. The sun, high in the sky, burst through the
shutters and lit up the dingy room.
"I'll stay here," Laney said. "You're going to Pluto?"
He nodded.
"Kanaday was supposed to be going to Pluto. He was heading there when
that explosion finished his foot. He never got there after that."
"Poor old Kanaday," Rolf said.
"I'll miss him too. I guess I'll have to run the boarding-house now. For
a while. Will you come back here when your year's up?"
"I suppose so," Rolf said without looking up. "This town is no worse
than any of the other Spacertowns. No better, but no worse." He slowly
lifted his head and looked at her as she stood there facing him.
"I hope you come back," she said.
The sun was coming in from behind her, now, and lighting her up. She was
rugged, all right, and strong: a good hard worker. And she was well
built. Suddenly his aches became less painful, as he looked at her and
realized that she was infinitely more beautiful than the slick,
glossy-looking girl he had kissed on the veranda, who had bought her
teeth at a store and had gotten her figure from a surgeon. Laney, at
least, was real.
"You know," he said at last, "I think I have an idea. You wait here and
I'll come get you when my year's up. I'll have enough to pay passage to
Venus for two. We can get a slightly smaller mansion than I planned on
getting. But we can get it. Some parts of Venus are beautiful. And the
closest those monkeys from Yawk can get to it is to look at it in the
night sky. You think it's a good idea?"
"I think it's a great idea," she said, moving toward him. Her head was
nearly as high as his own.
"I'll go back to space. I have to, to keep my rating. But you'll wait
for me, won't you?"
"I'll wait."
And as he drew her close, he knew she meant it.
THE END
The Ignoble Savages
By EVELYN E. SMITH
Illustrated by DILLON
Snaddra had but one choice in its fight
to afford to live belowground--underhandedly
pretend theirs was an aboveboard society!
"Go Away from me, Skkiru," Larhgan said, pushing his hand off her arm.
"A beggar does not associate with the high priestess of Snaddra."
"But the Earthmen aren't due for another fifteen minutes," Skkiru
protested.
"Of what importance are fifteen minutes compared to eternity!" she
exclaimed. Her lovely eyes fuzzed softly with emotion. "You don't seem
to realize, Skkiru, that this isn't just a matter of minutes or hours.
It's forever."
"Forever!" He looked at her incredulously. "You mean we're going to
keep this up as a permanent thing? You're joking!"
Bbulas groaned, but Skkiru didn't care about that. The sad, sweet way
Larhgan shook her beautiful head disturbed him much more, and when
she said, "No, Skkiru, I am not joking," a tiny pang of doubt and
apprehension began to quiver in his second smallest left toe.
"This is, in effect, good-by," she continued. "We shall see each other
again, of course, but only from a distance. On feast days, perhaps you
may be permitted to kiss the hem of my robe ... but that will be all."
Skkiru turned to the third person present in the council chamber.
"Bbulas, this is your fault! It was all your idea!"
There was regret on the Dilettante's thin face--an obviously insincere
regret, the younger man knew, since he was well aware how Bbulas had
always felt about the girl.
"I am sorry, Skkiru," Bbulas intoned. "I had fancied you understood.
This is not a game we are playing, but a new way of life we are
adopting. A necessary way of life, if we of Snaddra are to keep on
living at all."
"It's not that I don't love you, Skkiru," Larhgan put in gently, "but
the welfare of our planet comes first."
  *  *  *  *  *
She had been seeing too many of the Terrestrial fictapes from the
library, Skkiru thought resentfully. There was too damn much Terran
influence on this planet. And this new project was the last straw.
No longer able to control his rage and grief, he turned a triple
somersault in the air with rage. "Then why was I made a beggar and she
the high priestess? You arranged that purposely, Bbulas. You--"
"Now, Skkiru," Bbulas said wearily, for they had been through all this
before, "you know that all the ranks and positions were distributed
by impartial lot, except for mine, and, of course, such jobs as could
carry over from the civilized into the primitive."
Bbulas breathed on the spectacles he was wearing, as contact lenses
were not considered backward enough for the kind of planet Snaddra
was now supposed to be, and attempted to wipe them dry on his robe.
However, the thick, jewel-studded embroidery got in his way and so he
was forced to lift the robe and wipe all three of the lenses on the
smooth, soft, spun metal of his top underskirt.
"After all," he went on speaking as he wiped, "I have to be high
priest, since I organized this culture and am the only one here
qualified to administer it. And, as the president himself concurred in
these arrangements, I hardly think you--a mere private citizen--have
the right to question them."
"Just because you went to school in another solar system," Skkiru said,
whirling with anger, "you think you're so smart!"
"I won't deny that I do have educational and cultural advantages
which were, unfortunately, not available to the general populace of
this planet. However, even under the old system, I was always glad to
utilize my superior attainments as Official Dilettante for the good of
all and now--"
"Sure, glad to have a chance to rig this whole setup so you could break
up things between Larhgan and me. You've had your eye on her for some
time."
Skkiru coiled his antennae at Bbulas, hoping the insult would provoke
him into an unbecoming whirl, but the Dilettante remained calm. One of
the chief outward signs of Terran-type training was self-control and
Bbulas had been thoroughly terranized.
_I hate Terrestrials_, Skkiru said to himself. _I hate Terra._ The
quiver of anxiety had risen up his leg and was coiling and uncoiling
in his stomach. He hoped it wouldn't reach his antennae--if he were
to break down and psonk in front of Larhgan, it would be the final
humiliation.
"Skkiru!" the girl exclaimed, rotating gently, for she, like her
fiance--her erstwhile fiance, that was, for the new regime had caused
all such ties to be severed--and every other literate person on the
planet, had received her education at the local university. Although
sound, the school was admittedly provincial in outlook and very poor
in the emotional department. "One would almost think that the lots had
some sort of divine intelligence behind them, because you certainly are
behaving in a beggarly manner!"
"And I have already explained to you, Skkiru," Bbulas said, with a
patience much more infuriating than the girl's anger, "that I had no
idea of who was to become my high priestess. The lots chose Larhgan. It
is, as the Earthmen say, kismet."
  *  *  *  *  *
He adjusted the fall of his glittering robe before the great polished
four-dimensional reflector that formed one wall of the chamber.
_Kismet_, Skkiru muttered to himself, _and a little sleight of hand._
But he didn't dare offer this conclusion aloud; the libel laws of
Snaddra were very severe. So he had to fall back on a weak, "And I
suppose it is kismet that makes us all have to go live out on the
ground during the day, like--like savages."
"It is necessary," Bbulas replied without turning.
"Pooh," Skkiru said. "Pooh, _pooh_, POOH!"
Larhgan's dainty earflaps closed. "Skkiru! Such language!"
"As you said," Bbulas murmured, contemptuously coiling one antenna at
Skkiru, "the lots chose well and if you touch me, Skkiru, we shall have
another drawing for beggar and you will be made a metal-worker."
"But I can't work metal!"
"Then that will make it much worse for you than for the other
outcasts," Bbulas said smugly, "because you will be a pariah without a
trade."
"Speaking of pariahs, that reminds me, Skkiru, before I forget, I'd
better give you back your grimpatch--" Larhgan handed the glittering
bauble to him--"and you give me mine. Since we can't be betrothed any
longer, you might want to give yours to some nice beggar girl."
"I don't want to give my grimpatch to some nice beggar girl!" Skkiru
yelled, twirling madly in the air.
"As for me," she sighed, standing soulfully on her head, "I do not
think I shall ever marry. I shall make the religious life my career.
Are there going to be any saints in your mythos, Bbulas?"
"Even if there will be," Bbulas said, "you certainly won't qualify if
you keep putting yourself into a position which not only represents a
trait wholly out of keeping with the new culture, but is most unseemly
with the high priestess's robes."
Larhgan ignored his unfeeling observations. "I shall set myself apart
from mundane affairs," she vowed, "and I shall pretend to be happy,
even though my heart will be breaking."
It was only at that moment that Skkiru realized just how outrageous the
whole thing really was. There must be another solution to the planet's
problem. "Listen--" he began, but just then excited noises filtered
down from overhead. It was too late.
"Earth ship in view!" a squeaky voice called through the intercom.
"Everybody topside and don't forget your shoes."
Except the beggar. Beggars went barefoot. Beggars suffered. Bbulas had
made him beggar purposely, and the lots were a lot of slibwash.
"Hurry up, Skkiru."
  *  *  *  *  *
Bbulas slid the ornate headdress over his antennae, which, already
gilded and jeweled, at once seemed to become a part of it. He looked
pretty damn silly, Skkiru thought, at the same time conscious of his
own appearance--which was, although picturesque enough to delight
romantic Terrestrial hearts, sufficiently wretched to charm the most
hardened sadist.
"Hurry up, Skkiru," Bbulas said. "They mustn't suspect the existence of
the city underground or we're finished before we've started."
"For my part, I wish we'd never started," Skkiru grumbled. "What was
wrong with our old culture, anyway?"
That was intended as a rhetorical question, but Bbulas answered it
anyway. He always answered questions; it had never seemed to penetrate
his mind that school-days were long since over.
"I've told you a thousand times that our old culture was too much like
the Terrans' own to be of interest to them," he said, with affected
weariness. "After all, most civilized societies are basically similar;
it is only primitive societies that differ sharply, one from the
other--and we have to be different to attract Earthmen. They're pretty
choosy. You've got to give them what they want, and that's what they
want. Now take up your post on the edge of the field, try to look
hungry, and remember this isn't for you or for me, but for Snaddra."
"For Snaddra," Larhgan said, placing her hand over her anterior heart
in a gesture which, though devout on Earth--or so the fictapes seemed
to indicate--was obscene on Snaddra, owing to the fact that certain
essential organs were located in different areas in the Snaddrath than
in the corresponding Terrestrial life-form. Already the Terrestrial
influence was corrupting her, Skkiru thought mournfully. She had been
such a nice girl, too.
"We may never meet on equal terms again, Skkiru," she told him, with a
long, soulful glance that made his hearts sink down to his quivering
toes, "but I promise you there will never be anyone else for me--and
I hope that knowledge will inspire you to complete cooperation with
Bbulas."
"If that doesn't," Bbulas said, "I have other methods of inspiration."
"All right," Skkiru answered sulkily. "I'll go to the edge of the
field, and I'll speak broken Inter-galactic, and I'll forsake my normal
habits and customs, and I'll even _beg_. But I don't have to like doing
it, and I don't intend to like doing it."
All three of Larhgan's eyes fuzzed with emotion. "I'm proud of you,
Skkiru," she said brokenly.
Bbulas sniffed. The three of them floated up to ground level in a
triple silence.
  *  *  *  *  *
"Alms, for the love of Ipsnadd," Skkiru chanted, as the two Terrans
descended from the ship and plowed their way through the mud to meet a
procession of young Snaddrath dressed in elaborate ceremonial costumes,
and singing a popular ballad--to which less ribald, as well as less
inspiring, words than the originals had been fitted by Bbulas, just
in case, by some extremely remote chance, the Terrans had acquired a
smattering of Snadd somewhere. Since neither party was accustomed to
navigating mud, their progress was almost imperceptible.
"Alms, for the love of Ipsnadd," chanted Skkiru the beggar.
His teeth chattered as he spoke, for the rags he wore had been
custom-weatherbeaten for him by the planet's best tailor--now a pariah,
of course, because Snadd tailors were, naturally, metal-workers--and
the wind and the rain were joyously making their way through the
demolished wires. Never before had Skkiru been on the surface of the
planet, except to pass over, and he had actually touched it only when
taking off and landing. The Snaddrath had no means of land transport,
having previously found it unnecessary--but now both air-cars and
self-levitation were on the prohibited list as being insufficiently
primitive.
The outside was no place for a civilized human being, particularly
in the wet season or--more properly speaking on Snaddra--the wetter
season. Skkiru's feet were soaked with mud; not that the light sandals
worn by the members of the procession appeared to be doing them much
good, either. It gave him a kind of melancholy pleasure to see that the
privileged ones were likewise trying to repress shivers. Though their
costumes were rich, they were also scanty, particularly in the case
of the females, for Earthmen had been reported by tape and tale to be
humanoid.
As the mud clutched his toes, Skkiru remembered an idea he had once
gotten from an old sporting fictape of Terrestrial origin and had
always planned to experiment with, but had never gotten around to--the
weather had always been so weathery, there were so many other more
comfortable sports, Larhgan had wanted him to spend more of his leisure
hours with her, and so on. However, he still had the equipment, which
he'd salvaged from a wrecked air-car, in his apartment--and it was the
matter of a moment to run down, while Bbulas was looking the other way,
and get it.
Bbulas couldn't really object, Skkiru stilled the nagging quiver in
his toe, because what could be more primitive than any form of land
transport? And even though it took time to get the things, they worked
so well that, in spite of the procession's head start, he was at the
Earth ship long before the official greeters had reached it.
  *  *  *  *  *
The newcomers were indeed humanoid, he saw. Only the peculiarly
pasty color of their skins and their embarrassing lack of antennae
distinguished them visibly from the Snaddrath. They were dressed much
as the Snaddrath had been before they had adopted primitive garb.
In fact, the Terrestrials were quite decent-looking life-forms,
entirely different from the foppish monsters Skkiru had somehow
expected to represent the cultural ruling race. Of course, he had
frequently seen pictures of them, but everyone knew how easily those
could be retouched. Why, it was the Terrestrials themselves, he had
always understood, who had invented the art of retouching--thus proving
beyond a doubt that they had something to hide.
"Look, Raoul," the older of the two Earthmen said in Terran--which
the Snaddrath were not, according to the master plan, supposed to
understand, but which most of them did, for it was the fashionable
third language on most of the outer planets. "A beggar. Haven't seen
one since some other chaps and I were doing a spot of field work on
that little planet in the Arcturus system--what was its name? Glotch,
that's it. Very short study, it turned out to be. Couldn't get more
than a pamphlet out of it, as we were unable to stay long enough to
amass enough material for a really definitive work. The natives tried
to eat us, so we had to leave in somewhat of a hurry."
"Oh, they were cannibals?" the other Earthman asked, so respectfully
that it was easy to deduce he was the subordinate of the two. "How
horrible!"
"No, not at all," the other assured him. "They weren't human--another
species entirely--so you could hardly call it cannibalism. In fact, it
was quite all right from the ethical standpoint, but abstract moral
considerations seemed less important to us than self-preservation
just then. Decided that, in this case, it would be best to let the
missionaries get first crack at them. Soften them up, you know."
"And the missionaries--did they soften them up, Cyril?"
"They softened up the missionaries, I believe." Cyril laughed. "Ah,
well, it's all in the day's work."
"I hope these creatures are not man-eaters," Raoul commented, with
a polite smile at Cyril and an apprehensive glance at the oncoming
procession--_creatures indeed_! Skkiru thought, with a mental sniff.
"We have come such a long and expensive way to study them that it would
be indeed a pity if we also were forced to depart in haste. Especially
since this is my first field trip and I would like to make good at it."
"Oh, you will, my boy, you will." Cyril clapped the younger man on the
shoulder. "I have every confidence in your ability."
Either he was stupid, Skkiru thought, or he was lying, in spite of
Bbulas' asseverations that untruth was unknown to Terrestrials--which
had always seemed highly improbable, anyway. How could any intelligent
life-form possibly stick to the truth all the time? It wasn't human; it
wasn't even humanoid; it wasn't even polite.
"The natives certainly appear to be human enough," Raoul added, with
an appreciative glance at the females, who had been selected for the
processional honor with a view to reported Terrestrial tastes. "Some
slight differences, of course--but, if two eyes are beautiful, three
eyes can be fifty per cent lovelier, and chartreuse has always been my
favorite color."
_If they stand out here in the cold much longer, they are going to turn
bright yellow._ His own skin, Skkiru knew, had faded from its normal
healthy emerald to a sickly celadon.
  *  *  *  *  *
Cyril frowned and his companion's smile vanished, as if the contortion
of his superior's face had activated a circuit somewhere. _Maybe the
little one's a robot!_ However, it couldn't be--a robot would be better
constructed and less interested in females than Raoul.
"Remember," Cyril said sternly, "we must not establish undue rapport
with the native females. It tends to detract from true objectivity."
"Yes, Cyril," Raoul said meekly.
Cyril assumed a more cheerful aspect "I should like to give this chap
something for old times' sake. What do you suppose is the medium of
exchange here?"
_Money_, Skkiru said to himself, but he didn't dare contribute this
piece of information, helpful though it would be.
"How should I know?" Raoul shrugged.
"Empathize. Get in there, old chap, and start batting."
"Why not give him a bar of chocolate, then?" Raoul suggested grumpily.
"The language of the stomach, like the language of love, is said to be
a universal one."
"Splendid idea! I always knew you had it in you, Raoul!"
Skkiru accepted the candy with suitable--and entirely genuine--murmurs
of gratitude. Chocolate was found only in the most expensive of the
planet's delicacy shops--and now neither delicacy shops nor chocolate
were to be found, so, if Bbulas thought he was going to save the gift
to contribute it later to the Treasury, the "high priest" was off his
rocker.
To make sure there would be no subsequent dispute about possession,
Skkiru ate the candy then and there. Chocolate increased the body's
resistance to weather, and never before had he had to endure so much
weather all at once.
On Earth, he had heard, where people lived exposed to weather, they
often sickened of it and passed on--which helped to solve the problem
of birth control on so vulgarly fecund a planet. Snaddra, alas, needed
no such measures, for its population--like its natural resources--was
dwindling rapidly. Still, Skkiru thought, as he moodily munched on the
chocolate, it would have been better to flicker out on their own than
to descend to a subterfuge like this for nothing more than survival.
  *  *  *  *  *
Being a beggar, Skkiru discovered, did give him certain small,
momentary advantages over those who had been alloted higher ranks.
For one thing, it was quite in character for him to tread curiously
upon the strangers' heels all the way to the temple--a ramshackle
affair, but then it had been run up in only three days--where the
official reception was to be held. The principal difficulty was that,
because of his equipment, he had a little trouble keeping himself from
overshooting the strangers. And though Bbulas might frown menacingly at
him--and not only for his forwardness--that was in character on both
sides, too.
Nonetheless, Skkiru could not reconcile himself to his beggarhood, no
matter how much he tried to comfort himself by thinking at least he
wasn't a pariah like the unfortunate metal-workers who had to stand
segregated from the rest by a chain of their own devising--a poetic
thought, that was, but well in keeping with his beggarhood. Beggars
were often poets, he believed, and poets almost always beggars. Since
metal-working was the chief industry of Snaddra, this had provided the
planet automatically with a large lowest caste. Bbulas had taken the
easy way out.
Skkiru swallowed the last of the chocolate and regarded the "high
priest" with a simple-minded mendicant's grin. However, there were
volcanic passions within him that surged up from his toes when, as the
wind and rain whipped through his scanty coverings, he remembered the
snug underskirts Bbulas was wearing beneath his warm gown. They were
metal, but they were solid. All the garments visible or potentially
visible were of woven metal, because, although there was cloth on the
planet, it was not politic for the Earthmen to discover how heavily the
Snaddrath depended upon imports.
As the Earthmen reached the temple, Larhgan now appeared to join Bbulas
at the head of the long flight of stairs that led to it. Although
Skkiru had seen her in her priestly apparel before, it had not made
the emotional impression upon him then that it did now, when, standing
there, clad in beauty, dignity and warm clothes, she bade the newcomers
welcome in several thousand words not too well chosen for her by
Bbulas--who fancied himself a speech-writer as well as a speech-maker,
for there was no end to the man's conceit.
The difference between her magnificent garments and his own miserable
rags had their full impact upon Skkiru at this moment. He saw the gulf
that had been dug between them and, for the first time in his short
life, he felt the tormenting pangs of caste distinction. She looked so
lovely and so remote.
"... and so you are most welcome to Snaddra, men of Earth," she was
saying in her melodious voice. "Our resources may be small but our
hearts are large, and what little we have, we offer with humility and
with love. We hope that you will enjoy as long and as happy a stay here
as you did on Nemeth...."
Cyril looked at Raoul, who, however, seemed too absorbed in
contemplating Larhgan's apparently universal charms to pay much
attention to the expression on his companion's face.
"... and that you will carry our affection back to all the peoples of
the Galaxy."
  *  *  *  *  *
She had finished. And now Cyril cleared his throat. "Dear friends, we
were honored by your gracious invitation to visit this fair planet, and
we are honored now by the cordial reception you have given to us."
The crowd yoomped politely. After a slight start, Cyril went on,
apparently deciding that applause was all that had been intended.
"We feel quite sure that we are going to derive both pleasure and
profit from our stay here, and we promise to make our intensive
analysis of your culture as painless as possible. We wish only to study
your society, not to tamper with it in any way."
_Ha, ha_, Skkiru said to himself. _Ha, ha, ha!_
"But why is it," Raoul whispered in Terran as he glanced around out of
the corners of his eyes, "that only the beggar wears mudshoes?"
"Shhh," Cyril hissed back. "We'll find out later, when we've
established rapport. Don't be so impatient!"
Bbulas gave a sickly smile. Skkiru could almost find it in his hearts
to feel sorry for the man.
"We have prepared our best hut for you, noble sirs," Bbulas said with
great self-control, "and, by happy chance, this very evening a small
but unusually interesting ceremony will be held outside the temple. We
hope you will be able to attend. It is to be a rain dance."
"Rain dance!" Raoul pulled his macintosh together more tightly at the
throat. "But why do you want rain? My faith, not only does it rain now,
but the planet seems to be a veritable sea of mud. Not, of course," he
added hurriedly as Cyril's reproachful eye caught his, "that it is not
attractive mud. Finest mud I have ever seen. Such texture, such color,
such aroma!"
Cyril nodded three times and gave an appreciative sniff.
"But," Raoul went on, "one can have too much of even such a good thing
as mud...."
The smile did not leave Bbulas' smooth face. "Yes, of course, honorable
Terrestrials. That is why we are holding this ceremony. It is not a
dance to bring on rain. It is a dance to _stop_ rain."
He was pretty quick on the uptake, Skkiru had to concede. However,
that was not enough. The man had no genuine organizational ability.
In the time he'd had in which to plan and carry out a scheme for
the improvement of Snaddra, surely he could have done better than
this high-school theocracy. For one thing, he could have apportioned
the various roles so that each person would be making a definite
contribution to the society, instead of creating some positions plums,
like the priesthood, and others prunes, like the beggarship.
What kind of life was that for an active, ambitious young man, standing
around begging? And, moreover, from whom was Skkiru going to beg?
Only the Earthmen, for the Snaddrath, no matter how much they threw
themselves into the spirit of their roles, could not be so carried
away that they would give handouts to a young man whom they had been
accustomed to see basking in the bosom of luxury.
  *  *  *  *  *
Unfortunately, the fees that he'd received in the past had not enabled
him both to live well and to save, and now that his fortunes had been
so drastically reduced, he seemed in a fair way of starving to death.
It gave him a gentle, moody pleasure to envisage his own funeral,
although, at the same time, he realized that Bbulas would probably have
to arrange some sort of pension for him; he could not expect Skkiru's
patriotism to extend to abnormal limits. A man might be willing to die
for his planet in many ways--but wantonly starving to death as the
result of a primitive affectation was hardly one of them.
All the same, Skkiru reflected as he watched the visitors being led off
to the native hut prepared for them, how ignominious it would be for
one of the brightest young architects on the planet to have to subsist
miserably on the dole just because the world had gone aboveground. The
capital had risen to the surface and the other cities would soon follow
suit. Meanwhile, a careful system of tabus had been designed to keep
the Earthmen from discovering the existence of those other cities.
He could, of course, emigrate to another part of the planet, to one of
them, and stave off his doom for a while--but that would not be playing
the game. Besides, in such a case, he wouldn't be able to see Larhgan.
As if all this weren't bad enough, he had been done an injury which
struck directly at his professional pride. He hadn't even been allowed
to help in planning the huts. Bbulas and some workmen had done all that
themselves with the aid of some antique blueprints that had been put
out centuries before by a Terrestrial magazine and had been acquired
from a rare tape-and-book dealer on Gambrell, for, Skkiru thought, far
too high a price. He could have designed them himself just as badly and
much more cheaply.
It wasn't that Skkiru didn't understand well enough that Snaddra had
been forced into making such a drastic change in its way of life.
What resources it once possessed had been depleted and--aside from
minerals--they had never been very extensive to begin with. All
life-forms on the planet were on the point of extinction, save fish and
rice--the only vegetable that would grow on Snaddra, and originally a
Terran import at that. So food and fiber had to be brought from the
other planets, at fabulous expense, for Snaddra was not on any of
the direct trade routes and was too unattractive to lure the tourist
business.
Something definitely had to be done, if it were not to decay
altogether. And that was where the Planetary Dilettante came in.
  *  *  *  *  *
The traditional office of Planetary Dilettante was a civil-service
job, awarded by competitive examination whenever it fell vacant to
the person who scored highest in intelligence, character and general
gloonatz. However, the tests were inadequate when it came to measuring
sense of proportion, adaptiveness and charm--and there, Skkiru felt,
was where the essential flaw lay. After all, no really effective test
would have let a person like Bbulas come out on top.
The winner was sent to Gambrell, the nearest planet with a Terran
League University, to be given a thorough Terran-type education. No
individual on Snaddra could afford such schooling, no matter how
great his personal fortune, because the transportation costs were so
immense that only a government could afford them. That was the reason
why only one person in each generation could be chosen to go abroad at
the planet's expense and acquire enough finish to cover the rest of the
population.
The Dilettante's official function had always been, in theory, to serve
the planet when an emergency came--and this, old Luccar, the former
President, had decided, when he and the Parliament had awakened to the
fact that Snaddra was falling into ruin, was an emergency. So he had,
after considerable soul-searching, called upon Bbulas to plan a method
of saving Snaddra--and Bbulas, happy to be in the limelight at last,
had come up with this program.
It was not one Skkiru himself would have chosen. It was not one, he
felt, that any reasonable person would have chosen. Nevertheless, the
Bbulas Plan had been adopted by a majority vote of the Snaddrath,
largely because no one had come up with a feasible alternative and,
as a patriotic citizen, Skkiru would abide by it. He would accept the
status of beggar; it was his duty to do so. Moreover, as in the case of
the planet, there was no choice.
But all was not necessarily lost, he told himself. Had he not, in his
anthropological viewings--though Bbulas might have been the only one
privileged to go on ethnological field trips to other planets, he was
not the only one who could use a library--seen accounts of societies
where beggarhood could be a rewarding and even responsible station in
life? There was no reason why, within the framework of the primitive
society Bbulas had created to allure Terran anthropologists, Skkiru
should not make something of himself and show that a beggar was worthy
of the high priestess's hand--which would be entirely in the Terran
primitive tradition of romance.
"Skkiru!" Bbulas was screaming, as he spun, now that the Terrans were
out of ear- and eye-shot "Skkiru, you idiot, listen to me! What are
those ridiculous things you are wearing on your silly feet?"
Skkiru protruded all of his eyes in innocent surprise. "Just some
old pontoons I took from a wrecked air-car once. I have a habit of
collecting junk and I thought--"
Bbulas twirled madly in the air. "You are not supposed to think. Leave
all the thinking to me!"
"Yes, Bbulas," Skkiru said meekly.
  *  *  *  *  *
He would have put up an argument, but he had bigger plans in mind and
he didn't want them impeded in any way.
"But they seem like an excellent idea," Luccar suggested. "Primitive
and yet convenient."
Bbulas slowed down and gulped. After all, in spite of the fact that
he was now only chief yam-stealer--being prevented from practicing
his profession simply because there were no yams on the planet and no
one was quite certain what they were--Luccar had once been elected
President by a large popular majority. And a large popular majority is
decidedly a force to be reckoned with anywhere in the Galaxy.
"Any deviations arouse comment," Bbulas explained tightly.
"But if we all--"
"There would not be enough pontoons to go around, even if we stripped
all the air-cars."
"I see," Luccar said thoughtfully. "We couldn't make--?"
"No time!" Bbulas snapped. "All right, Skkiru--get those things off
your feet!"
"Will do," Skkiru agreed. It would be decidedly unwise to put up an
argument now. So he'd get his feet muddy; it was all part of the higher
good.
Later, as soon as the rain-dance rehearsals were under way, he slipped
away. No part had been assigned to him anyhow, except that of
onlooker, and he thought he could manage that without practice. He went
down to the library, where, since all the attendants were aboveground,
he could browse in the stacks to his hearts' content, without having
to fill out numerous forms and be shoved about like a plagiarist or
something.
If the Earthmen were interested in really primitive institutions, he
thought, they should have a look at the city library. The filing system
was really medieval. However, the library would, of course, be tabu for
them, along with the rest of the city, which was not supposed to exist.
As far as the Terrans were to know, the group of lumpy stone huts
(they should, properly speaking, have been wood, but wood was too rare
and expensive) was the capital of Snaddra. It would be the capital
of Snaddra for the Snaddrath, too, except during the hours of rest,
when they would be permitted to retire unobtrusively to their cozy
well-drained quarters beneath the mud. Life was going to be hard from
now on--unless the Bbulas Plan moved faster than Bbulas himself had
anticipated. And that would never happen without implementation from
without. From without Bbulas, that was.
Skkiru got to work on the tex-tapes and soon decided upon his area of
operations. Bbulas had concentrated so much effort on the ethos of the
planet that he had devoted insufficient detail to the mythos. That,
therefore, was the field in which Skkiru felt he must concentrate. And
concentrate he did.
  *  *  *  *  *
The rain dance, which had been elaborately staged by the planet's
finest choreographers, came to a smashing climax, after which there was
a handsome display of fireworks.
"But it is still raining," Raoul protested.
"Did you expect the rain to stop?" Bbulas asked, his eyes bulging
with involuntary surprise. "I mean--" he said, hastily retracting
them--"well, it doesn't always stop right away. The gods may not have
been feeling sufficiently propitious."
"Thought you had only one god, old boy," Cyril observed, after giving
his associate a searching glance. "Chap by the name of Whipsnade or
some such."
"Ipsnadd. He is our chief deity. But we have a whole pantheon. Major
gods and minor gods. Heroes and demigods and nature spirits--"
"And do not forget the prophets," Larhgan put in helpfully. As former
Chief Beauty of the planet (an elective civil-service office), she was
not accustomed to being left out of things. "We have many prophets. And
saints. I myself am studying to be a--"
Bbulas glared at her. Though her antennae quivered sulkily, she stopped
and said no more--for the moment, anyway.
"Sounds like quite a complex civilization," Cyril commented.
"No, no!" Bbulas protested in alarm. "We are a simple primitive people
without technological pretensions."
"You don't need any," Cyril assured him. "Not when you have fireworks
that function in the rain."
Inside himself, Skkiru guffawed.
"We are a simple people," Bbulas repeated helplessly. "A very simple
and very primitive people."
"Somehow," Raoul said, "I feel you may have a quality that civilization
may have lost." The light in his eyes was recognizable to any even
remotely humanoid species as a mystic glow.
But Cyril seemed well in command of the situation. "Come now, Raoul,"
he laughed, clapping his young colleague on the shoulder, "don't fall
into the Rousseau trap--noble savage and all that sort of rot!"
"But that beggar!" Raoul insisted. "Trite, certainly, but incredible
nonetheless! Before, one only read of such things--"
A glazed look came into two of Bbulas' eyes, while the third closed
despairingly. "What beggar? What beggar? Tell me--I must know ... as if
I didn't really," he muttered in Snaddrath.
"The only beggar we've seen on this planet so far. That one."
  *  *  *  *  *
With a wave of his hand, Cyril indicated the modest form of Skkiru,
attempting to conceal himself behind Luccar's portly person.
"I realize it was only illusion, but, as my associate says, a
remarkably good one. And," Cyril added, "an even more remarkable
example of cultural diffusion."
"What do you mean? Please, gracious and lovable Terrans, deign to tell
me what you mean. What did that insufferable beggar do?"
In spite of himself, Skkiru's knees flickered. _Fool_, he told himself,
_you knew it was bound to come out sooner or later. Take courage in
your own convictions; be convinced by your own courage. All he really
can do is yell._
"He did the Indian rope trick for us," Raoul explained. "And very well,
too. Very well indeed."
"The--Indian rope trick!" Bbulas spluttered. "Why, the--" And then he
recollected his religious vocation, as well as his supposed ignorance.
"Would you be so kind as to tell me what the Indian rope trick is, good
sirs?"
"Well, he did it with a chain, actually."
"We have no ropes on this planet," Larhgan contributed. "We are
backward."
"And a small boy went up and disappeared," Raoul finished.
Suddenly forgetting the stiff-upper-lip training for which the planet
had gone to such great expense, Bbulas spun around and around in a
fit of bad temper, to Skkiru's great glee. Fortunately, the Dilettante
retained enough self-control to keep his feet on the ground--perhaps
remembering that to fail to do so would compound Skkiru's crime.
"Dervishism!" Raoul exclaimed, his eyes incandescent with interest. He
pulled out his notebook. After biting his lip thoughtfully, Cyril did
the same.
"Just like Skkiru!" Bbulas gasped as he spun slowly to a stop. "He is a
disruptive cultural mechanism. Leading children astray!"
"But not at all," Raoul pointed out politely. "The boy came back
unharmed and in the best of spirits."
"So far as we could see," Cyril amended. "Of course there may have been
psychic damage."
"Which boy was it?" Bbulas demanded.
  *  *  *  *  *
Cyril pointed to the urchin in question--a rather well-known juvenile
delinquent, though the Terrestrials, of course, couldn't know that.
"He is a member of my own clan," Bbulas said. "He will be thrashed
soundly."
"But why punish him?" Raoul asked. "What harm has he done?"
"Shhh," Cyril warned him. "You may be touching on a tabu. What's the
matter with you, anyway? One would think you had forgotten every lesson
you ever learned."
"Oh, I am truly sorry!" Raoul's face became a pleasing shade of pink,
which made him look much more human. Maybe it was the wrong color, but
at least it was a color. "Please to accept my apologies, reverend sir."
"It's quite all right." Bbulas reverted to graciousness. "The boy
should not have associated with a beggar--especially that one. If he
did not hold his post by time-hallowed tradition, we would--dispose of
him. He has always been a trouble-maker."
"But I do not understand," Raoul persisted. Skkiru could not understand
why Cyril did not stop him again. "The beggar did the trick very
effectively. I know it was all illusion, but I should like to know just
how he created such an illusion, and, moreover, how the Indian rope
trick got all the way to--"
"It was all done by magic," Bbulas said firmly. "Magic outside the
temple is not encouraged, because it is black magic, and so it is
wrong. The magic of the priests is white magic, and so it is right. Put
that down in your little book."
Raoul obediently wrote it down. "Still, I should like to know--"
"Let us speak of pleasanter things," Bbulas interrupted again.
"Tomorrow night, we are holding a potlatch and we should be honored to
have the pleasure of your company."
"Delighted," Raoul bowed.
"I was wrong," Cyril said. "This is not a remarkable example of
cultural diffusion. It is a remarkable example of a diffuse culture."
  *  *  *  *  *
"But I cannot understand," Raoul said to Cyril later, in the imagined
privacy of their hut. "Why are you suspicious of this charming,
friendly people, so like the natives that the textbooks lead one to
expect?"
_Naturally_, Skkiru--having made his way in through a secret passage
known only to the entire population of the city and explicitly designed
for espionage, and was spying outside the door--thought, _we are
textbook natives. Not only because we were patterned on literary
prototypes, but because Bbulas never really left school--in spirit,
anyway. He is the perpetual undergraduate and his whole scheme is
nothing more than a grandiose Class Night._
"Precisely what I've been thinking," Cyril said. "So like the
textbooks--all the textbooks put together."
"What do you mean? Surely it is possible for analogous cultural
features to develop independently in different cultures?"
"Oh, it's possible, all right. Probability--particularly when it comes
to such a great number of features packed into one small culture--is
another matter entirely."
"I cannot understand you," Raoul objected. "What do you want of these
poor natives? To me, it seems everything has been of the most idyllic.
Rapport was established almost immediately."
"A little too immediately, perhaps, don't you think? You haven't had
much experience, Raoul, so you might not be aware it usually isn't as
easy as this."
Cyril flung himself down on one of the cots that had been especially
hardened for Terrestrial use and blew smoke rings at the ceiling.
Skkiru was dying for a cigarette himself, but that was another cultural
feature the Snaddrath had to dispense with now--not that smoking was
insufficiently primitive, but that tobacco was not indigenous to the
planet.
"That is because they are not a hostile people," Raoul insisted.
"Apparently they have no enemies. Nonetheless, they are of the utmost
interest. I hardly expected to land a society like this on my very
first field trip," he added joyfully. "Never have I heard of so dynamic
a culture! Never!"
"Nor I," Cyril agreed, "and this is far from being my very first
field trip. It has a terribly large number of strange elements in
it--strange, that is, when considered in relationship to the society
as a whole. Environmental pressures seem to have had no effect upon
their culture. For instance, don't you think it rather remarkable that
a people with such an enormously complex social structure as theirs
should wear clothing so ill adapted to protect them from the weather?"
  *  *  *  *  *
"Well," Raoul pointed out enthusiastically--another undergraduate type,
Skkiru observed, happiest with matters that either resembled those in
books or came directly from them, so that they could be explicitly
pigeonholed--"the Indians of Tierra del Fuego wore nothing but
waist-length sealskin capes even in the bitterest cold. Of course, this
civilization is somewhat more advanced than theirs in certain ways, but
one finds such anomalies in all primitive civilizations, does one not?"
"That's true to a certain extent. But one would think they'd at least
have developed boots to cope with the mud. And why was the beggar the
only one to wear mudshoes? Why, moreover--" Cyril narrowed his eyes and
pointed his cigarette at Raoul--"did he wear them only the first time
and subsequently appear barefooted?"
"That _was_ odd," Raoul admitted, "but--"
"And the high priest spoke of thrashing that boy. You should know, old
chap, that cruelty to children is in inverse ratio to the degree of
civilization."
Raoul stared at his colleague. "My faith, are you suggesting that we go
see how hard they hit him, then?"
Cyril laughed. "All I suggest is that we keep a very open mind about
this society until we can discover what fundamental attitudes are
controlling such curious individual as well as group behavior."
"But assuredly. That is what we are here for, is it not? So why are you
disturbing yourself so much?"
But it was Raoul, Skkiru thought, who appeared much more disturbed
than Cyril. It was understandable--the younger man was interested only
in straightforward ethnologizing and undoubtedly found the developing
complications upsetting.
"Look," Cyril continued. "They call this place a hut. It's almost a
palace."
_My God_, Skkiru thought, _what kind of primitive conditions are they
used to?_
"That is largely a question of semantics," Raoul protested. "But
regard--the roof leaks. Is that not backward enough for you, eh?" And
Raoul moved to another part of the room to avoid receiving indisputable
proof of the leakage on his person. "What is more, the sanitary
arrangements are undeniably primitive."
"The roofs of many palaces leak, and there is no plumbing to speak of,
and still they are not called huts. And tell me this--why should the
metal-workers be the pariahs? Why _metal-workers_?"
Raoul's eyes opened wide. "You know there is often an outcast class
with no apparent rationale behind its establishment. All the tapes--"
"True enough, but you will remember that the reason the smiths of
Masai were pariahs was that they manufactured weapons which might tempt
people to commit bloodshed. I keep remembering them, somehow. I keep
remembering so many things here...."
"But we have seen no weapons on this planet," Raoul argued. "In fact,
the people seem completely peaceful."
"Right you are." Cyril blew another smoke ring. "Since this is a planet
dependent chiefly upon minerals, why make the members of its most
important industry the out-group?"
"You think it is that they may be secretly hostile?"
Cyril smiled. "I think they may be secretly something, but hardly
hostile."
_Aha_, Skkiru thought. _Bbulas, my splendidly scaled friend, I will
have something interesting to tell you._
  *  *  *  *  *
"You idiot!" Bbulas snarled later that night, as most of the Snaddrath
met informally in the council chamber belowground, the new caste
distinctions being, if not forgotten, at least in abeyance--for
everyone except Bbulas. "You imbecile!" He whirled, unable to repress
his Snadd emotions after a long behaviorally Terran day. "I have half a
mind to get rid of you by calling down divine judgment."
"How would you do that?" Skkiru demanded, emboldened by the little cry
of dismay, accompanied by a semi-somersault, which Larhgan gave. In
spite of everything, she still loved him; she would never belong to
Bbulas, though he might plan until he was ochre in the face.
"Same way you did the rope trick. Only you wouldn't come back, my
boy. Nice little cultural trait for the ethnologists to put in their
peace pipes and smoke. Never saw such people for asking awkward
questions." Bbulas sighed and straightened his antennae with his
fingers, since their ornaments made them too heavy to allow reflective
verticalization. "Reminds me of final exams back on Gambrell."
"Anthropologists _always_ ask awkward questions--everybody knows that,"
Larhgan put in. "It's their function. And I don't think you should
speak that way to Skkiru, Bbulas. Like all of us, he's only trying to
do his best. No man--or woman--can do more."
She smiled at Skkiru and his hearts whirled madly inside him. Only a
dolt, he thought, would give way to despair; there was no need for this
intolerable situation to endure for a lifetime. If only he could solve
the problem more quickly than Bbulas expected or--Skkiru began to
understand--wanted, Larhgan could be his again.
"With everybody trying to run this planet," Bbulas snarled, taking off
his headdress, "no wonder things are going wrong."
Luccar intervened. Although it was obvious that he had been enjoying
to a certain extent the happy anonymity of functionless yam-stealer,
old elective responsibilities could not but hang heavy over a public
servant of such unimpeachable integrity.
"After all," the old man said, "secretly we're still a democracy, and
secretly I am still President, and secretly I'm beginning to wonder if
perhaps we weren't a little rash in--"
"Look here, all of you," Bbulas interrupted querulously. "I'm not doing
this for my own amusement."
  *  *  *  *  *
_But that's just what you are doing_, Skkiru thought, _even though you
wouldn't admit it to yourself, nor would you think of it as amusement._
"You know what happened to Nemeth," Bbulas continued, using an argument
that had convinced them before, but that was beginning to wear a little
thin now. "Poorest, most backward planet in the whole Galaxy. A couple
of ethnologists from Earth stumbled on it a little over a century ago
and what happened? More kept on coming; the trade ships followed. Now
it's the richest, most advanced planet in that whole sector. There's no
reason why the same thing can't happen to us in this sector, if we play
our cards carefully."
"But maybe these two won't tell other anthropologists about us," Luccar
said. "Something the older one remarked certainly seemed to imply as
much. Maybe they don't want the same thing to happen again--in which
case, all this is a waste of time. Furthermore," he concluded rather
petulantly, "at my age, I don't like running about in the open; it's
not healthful."
"If they don't tell other anthropologists about us," Bbulas said,
his face paling to lime-green with anxiety, "we can spread the news
unobtrusively ourselves. Just let one study be published, even under
false coordinates, and we can always hire a good public relations man
to let our whereabouts leak out. Please, everybody, stick to your
appointed tasks and let me do the worrying. You haven't even given this
culture a chance! It's hardly more than a day old and all I hear are
complaints, complaints, complaints."
"You'd better worry," Skkiru said smugly, "because already those
Terrans think there's something fishy about this culture. Ha, ha! Did
you get that--fishy?"
Only Larhgan laughed. She loved him.
"How do you know they're suspicious?" Bbulas demanded. "Are you in
their confidence? Skkiru, if you've been talking--"
"All I did was spy outside their door," Skkiru said hastily. "I knew
_you_ couldn't eavesdrop; it wouldn't look dignified if you were
caught. But beggars do that kind of thing all the time. And I wanted to
show you I could be of real use."
He beamed at Larhgan, who beamed back.
"I could have kept my findings to myself," he went on, "but I came to
tell you. In fact--" he dug in his robe--"I even jotted down a few
notes."
"It wasn't at all necessary, Skkiru," Bbulas said in a tired voice.
"We took the elementary precaution of wiring their hut for sound and a
recorder is constantly taking down their every word."
"Hut!" Skkiru kept his antennae under control with an effort, but his
retort was feeble. "They think it's a palace. You did them too well,
Bbulas."
"I may have overdone the exterior architecture a bit," the high priest
admitted. "Not that it seems relevant to the discussion. Although I've
been trying to arrange our primitivism according to Terrestrial ideas
of cultural backwardness, I'm afraid many of the physical arrangements
are primitive according to our conceptions rather than theirs."
  *  *  *  *  *
"Why _must_ we be primitive according to Terran ideas?" Luccar wanted
to know. "Why must we be slaves even to fashions in backwardness?"
"Hear, hear!" cried an anonymous voice.
"And thank you, Skkiru," the former President continued, "for telling
me they were suspicious. I doubt that Bbulas would have taken the
trouble to inform me of so trivial a matter."
"As high priest," Bbulas said stiffly, "I believe the matter, trivial
or not, now falls within my province."
"Shame!" cried an anonymous voice--or it might have been the same one.
Bbulas turned forest-green and his antennae twitched. "After all, you
yourself, Luccar, agreed to accept the role of elder statesman--"
"Yam-stealer," Luccar corrected him bitterly, "which is not the same
thing."
"On Earth, it is. And," Bbulas went on quickly, "as for our assuming
primitive Earth attitudes, where else are we going to get our attitudes
from? We can't borrow any primitive attitudes from Nemeth, because
they're too well known. And since there are no other planets we know
of with intelligent life-forms that have social structures markedly
different from the major Terran ones--except for some completely
non-humanoid cultures, which, for physiological reasons, we are
incapable of imitating--we have to rely upon records of primitive
Terran sources for information. Besides, a certain familiarity with
the traits manifested will make the culture more understandable to
the Terrans, and, hence, more attractive to them psychologically." He
stopped and straightened out his antennae.
"In other words," Skkiru commented, emboldened by a certain aura of
sympathy he felt emanating from Larhgan, at least, and probably from
Luccar, too, "he doesn't have the imagination to think up any cultural
traits for himself, so he has to steal them--and that's the easiest
place to steal them from."
"This is none of your business, Skkiru," Bbulas snapped. "You just beg."
"It's the business of all of us, Bbulas," Luccar corrected softly.
"Please to remember that, no matter what our alloted roles, we are all
concerned equally in this."
"Of course, of course, but please let me handle the situation in my own
way, since I made the plans. And, Skkiru," the Dilettante added with
strained grace, "you may have a warm cloak to wear as soon as we can
get patches welded on."
Then Bbulas took a deep breath and reverted to his old cheer-leader
manner. "Now we must all get organized for the potlatch. We can give
the Terrans those things the Ladies' Aid has been working on all year
for the charity bazaar and, in exchange, perhaps they will give us more
chocolate bars--" he glanced reproachfully at Skkiru--"and other food."
"And perhaps some yams," Luccar suggested, "so that--God save us--I can
steal them."
"I'll definitely work on that," Bbulas promised.
  *  *  *  *  *
Skkiru was glad that, as beggar, he held no prominent position at the
feast--in reality, no position at all--for he hated fish. And fish,
naturally, would be the chief refreshment offered, since the Snaddrath
did not want the Terrans to know that they had already achieved that
degrading dependency upon the tin can that marks one of the primary
differences between savagery and civilization.
There were fish pt on rice crackers, fish soup with rice, boiled
fish, baked fish, fried fish and a pilau of rice with fish. There were
fish chitlins, fish chips, fish cakes, fish candy and guslat--a potent
distillation of fermented fish livers--to wash it all down. And even
in the library, where Skkiru sought refuge from the festivities, fishy
fumes kept filtering down through the ventilating system to assail his
nostrils.
Bbulas had been right in a way, Skkiru had to admit to himself upon
reflection. In trying to improve his lot, Skkiru had taken advantage of
the Snaddrath's special kinetic talents, which had been banned for the
duration--and so he had, in effect, committed a crime.
This time, however, he would seek to uplift himself in terms acceptable
to the Terrans on a wholly indigenous level, and in terms which
would also hasten the desired corruptive process--in a nice way,
of course--so that the Snaddrath civilization could be profitably
undermined as fast as possible and Larhgan be his once again. It was a
hard problem to solve, but he felt sure he could do it. Anything Bbulas
could do, he could do better.
Then he had it! And the idea was so wonderful that he was a little
sorry at the limited range it would necessarily cover. His part really
should be played out before a large, yoomping audience, but he was
realistic enough to see that it would be most expedient for him to give
a private performance for the Earthmen alone.
On the other hand, he now knew it should be offered outside the hut,
because the recorder would pick up his cries and Bbulas would be in a
spin--as he would be about any evidence of independent thinking on the
planet. Bbulas was less interested in the planet's prospering, it was
now clear to Skkiru, than in its continuing in a state where he would
remain top fish.
  *  *  *  *  *
Fortunately, the guslat had done its work, and by the time the Earthmen
arrived at the door to their hut, they were alone. The rest of the
company either had fallen into a stupor or could not trust themselves
to navigate the mud.
The Earthmen--with an ingeniousness which would have augured well for
the future development of their race, had it not already been the
(allegedly) most advanced species in the Galaxy--had adapted some spare
parts from their ship into replicas of Skkiru's mudshoes. They did,
in truth, seem none too steady on their feet, but he was unable to
determine to what degree this was a question of intoxication and what
degree a question of navigation.
"Alms, for the love of Ipsnadd." He thrust forward his begging bowl.
"Regard, it is the beggar! Why were you not at the festivities, worthy
mendicant?" Raoul hiccuped. "Lovely party. Beautiful women. Delicious
fish."
Skkiru started to stand on his head, then remembered this was no longer
a socially acceptable expression of grief and cast his eyes down. "I
was not invited," he said sadly.
"Like the little match girl," Raoul sympathized. "My heart bleeds for
you, good match gi--good beggar. Does your heart not bleed for him,
Cyril?"
"Bad show," the older ethnologist agreed, with a faint smile. "But
that's what you've got to expect, if you're going to be a primitive."
He was very drunk, Skkiru decided; he must be, to phrase his sentiments
so poorly. Unless he--but no, Skkiru refused to believe that. He didn't
mind Cyril's being vaguely suspicious, but that was as far as he wanted
him to go. Skkiru's toes apprehensively started to quiver.
"How can you say a thing like that to a primitive?" Raoul demanded. "If
he were not a primitive, it would be all right to call him a primitive,
but one does not accuse primitives of being primitives. It's--it's
downright primitive; that's what it is!"
"You need some coffee, my boy." Cyril grinned. "Black coffee. That
guslat of theirs is highly potent stuff."
They were about to go inside. Skkiru had to act quickly. He slumped
over. Although he had meant to land on the doorstep, he lacked the
agility to balance himself with the precision required and so he fell
smack into the mud. The feel of the slime on his bare feet had been bad
enough; oozing over his skin through the interstices of his clothing,
it was pure hell. What sacrifices he was making for his planet! And
for Larhgan. The thought of her would have to sustain him through this
viscous ordeal, for there was nothing else solid within his grasp.
"Ubbl," he said, lifting his head from the ooze, so that they could see
the froth coming out of his mouth. "Glubbl."
  *  *  *  *  *
Raoul clutched Cyril. "What is he doing?"
"Having an epileptic fit, I rather fancy. Go on, old man," Cyril said
to Skkiru. "You're doing splendidly. Splendidly!"
"I see the sky!" Skkiru howled, anxious to get his prophecies over with
before he sank any deeper in the mud. "It is great magic. I see many
ships in the sky. They are all coming to Snaddra...."
"Bearing anthropologists and chocolate bars, I suppose," murmured
Cyril.
"Shhh," Raoul said indignantly. "You must not interrupt. He is having
personal contact with the supernatural, a very important element of the
primitive ethos."
"Thank you," Cyril said. "I'll try to remember that."
_So will I_, thought Skkiru. "They carry learned men and food for the
spiritually and physically hungry people of Snaddra," he interrupted
impatiently. "They carry warm clothing for the poor and miserable
people of Snaddra. They carry yams for the larcenous and frustrated
people of Snaddra."
"Yams!" Raoul echoed. "_Yams!_"
"Shhh, this is fascinating. Go on, beggar."
But the mud sogging over Skkiru's body was too much. The fit could be
continued at a later date--and in a drier location.
"Where am I?" he asked, struggling to a sitting position.
"You are on Snaddra, fifth planet of the sun Weebl," Raoul began, "in--"
"Weeeeebl," Skkiru corrected, getting to his feet with the older
ethnologist's assistance. "What happened?" He beat futilely at the mud
caught in the meshes of his metal rags. "I feel faint."
"Come in and have some coffee with us," Cyril invited. This also was
part of Skkiru's plan, for he had no intention of going back across
that mud, if he could possibly help it. He had nothing further
to say that the recorders should not hear. Bbulas might object to
his associating with the Earthmen, but he couldn't do much if the
association seemed entirely innocent. At the moment, Snaddra might be a
theocracy, but the democratic hangover was still strong.
"I would rather have some hot chocolate," Skkiru said. "That is, if you
have no objection to drinking with a beggar."
"My dear fellow--" Cyril put an arm around Skkiru's muddy
shoulders--"we ethnologists do not hold with caste distinctions. Come
in and have chocolate--with a spot of rum, eh? That'll make you right
as a trivet in a matter of seconds."
  *  *  *  *  *
It wasn't until much later, after several cups of the finest chocolate
he had ever tasted, that Skkiru announced himself to feel quite
recovered.
"Please do not bother to accompany me to the door," he said. "I can
find my own way. You do me too much honor. I would feel shamefaced."
"But--" Cyril began.
"No," Skkiru said. "It is--it is bad form here. I insist. I must go my
way alone."
"All right," Cyril agreed.
Raoul looked at him in some surprise.
"All right," Cyril repeated in a louder tone. "Go by yourself, if an
escort would bother you. But please give the door a good bang, so the
lock will catch."
Skkiru slammed the door lustily to simulate the effect of departure
and then he descended via the secret passage inside the hut itself,
scrabbling a little because the hot chocolate seemed strangely to have
affected his sense of balance.
The rest of the Snaddrath were in the council chamber gloating over the
loot from the potlatch. It was, as a matter of fact, a good take.
"Where were you, Skkiru?" Bbulas asked, examining a jar of preserved
kumquats suspiciously. "Up to no good, I'll be bound."
"Oh, my poor Skkiru!" Larhgan exclaimed, before Skkiru could say
anything. "How muddy and wretched-looking you are! I don't like this
whole thing," she told Bbulas. "It's cruel. Being high priestess isn't
nearly as much fun as I thought it would be."
"This is not supposed to be fun," the Dilettante informed her coldly.
"It is in dead earnest. Since the question has been brought up,
however, what did happen to you, Skkiru?"
"I--er--fell down and, being a beggar, I had no other garments to
change into."
"You'll survive," Bbulas said unfeelingly. "On Earth, I understand,
people fall into mud all the time. Supposed to have a beneficial
effect--and any effect on you, Skkiru, would have to be beneficial."
Larhgan was opening her mouth to say something--probably, Skkiru
thought fondly, in his defense--when there came a thud and a yell from
the passage outside. Two yells, in fact. And two thuds.
"My faith," exclaimed a Terrestrial voice, "but how did the beggar
descend! I am sure every bone in my body is broken."
"I think you'll find him possessed of means of locomotion not known to
us. But you're not hurt, old chap--only bruised."
And Cyril came into the council chamber, followed by a limping Raoul.
"Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. I trust this is not an intrusion,
although I'm quite sure you'll tell us we've broken a whole slue of
tabus."
"You!" Bbulas screamed at Skkiru. "You must have used the passage in
the hut! You let them follow you!"
Losing control of his own reflexes, he began to whirl madly.
  *  *  *  *  *
"But regard this!" Raoul exclaimed, staring around him. "To build a
place like this beneath the mud--name of a name, these people must
have hydraulic engineering far superior to anything on Earth!"
"You are too kind," the former hydraulic engineer said deprecatingly.
"Actually, it's quite simple--"
"This is not a primitive civilization at all, Raoul," Cyril explained.
"They've been faking it from tapes. Probably have a culture very much
like ours, with allowances for climatic differences, of course. Oh,
undoubtedly it would be provincial, but--"
"We are not provincial," Larhgan said coldly. "Primitive, yes.
Provincial, no! We are--"
"But why should they do a thing like this to us?" Raoul wailed.
"I imagine they did it to get on the trade routes, as Nemeth did.
They've been trying not to talk about Nemeth all the while. Must have
been rather a strain. You ought to be ashamed of yourselves!" Cyril
told the assembled Snaddrath. "Very bad form!"
Bbulas was turning paler and paler as he whirled. "All your fault," he
gasped hoarsely to Skkiru. "All your fault!"
And that was true, Skkiru realized. His antennae quivered, but he
didn't even try to restrain them. He had meant well, yet he had messed
up the planet's affairs far more seriously than Bbulas had. He had
ruined their hopes, killed all their chances by his carelessness.
He, Skkiru, instead of being his planet's savior, was its spoiler. He
psonked violently.
But Larhgan moved nearer to him. "It's all over, anyhow," she whispered,
"and you know what? I'm glad. I'm glad we failed. I'd rather starve as
myself than succeed as a sham."
Skkiru controlled himself. Silently, he took the grimpatch out of his
carrier and, as silently, she took it back.
"My faith, they must have had plumbing all the time!" Raoul complained.
"Very likely," said Cyril sternly. "Looks as if we've suffered for
nothing."
"Such people!" Raoul said. "True primitives, I am sure, would never
have behaved so unfeelingly!"
Cyril smiled, but his face was hard as he turned back to the Snaddrath.
"We'll radio Gambrell in the morning to have a ship dispatched to pick
us up. I'm not sure but that we have a good case for fraud against you."
"We're destroyed!" Bbulas shrieked as the full emotional impact of
the situation hit him. "An interplanetary lawsuit would ruin Snaddra
entirely."
His cries were echoed in the howls of the other Snaddrath, their
antennae psonking, their eyes bulging.
  *  *  *  *  *
Agonized by his sorrow, Bbulas lost all emotional restraint, forgot
about his Terrestrial training, and turned upside down in a spasm of
grief. Since there was no longer any reason to repress their natural
manifestation of feeling, all the Snaddrath followed suit, their
antennae twisting in frenzy as they ululated.
And then, to Skkiru's surprise and the surprise of all the rest, Cyril
stopped and took out his notebook. "Wait a minute," he said as Raoul
did likewise. All four Earthly eyes were shining with a glow that was
recognizable to any even remotely humanoid species as the glow of
intellectual fervor. "Wait just a minute! Our plans are altered. We may
stay, after all!"
One by one, the Snaddrath reversed to upright positions, but did not
retract their eyes, for they were still staring at the Earthmen. Skkiru
knew now what had been bothering him about the Terrestrials all along.
They were crazy--that was what it was. Who but maniacs would want to
leave their warm, dry planets and go searching the stars for strange
cultures, when they could stay quietly at home in peace and comfort
with their families?
Skkiru's hand reached out for Larhgan's and found it.OCTOBER , 1965 




OCTOBER 1965 
60c 



All Nfw Slofies by All Your Old Favorites in Galaxys 



PANGBORN 



SHtCKlEY 



ISAAC ASIMOV Founding Father 

H. L. GOLD Inside Man 

FRITZ LEIBER The Good New Days 

EDGAR PANGBORN A Better Mousehole 



FREDERIK POHL The Age Of The Pussyfoot 
ROBERT SHECKLEY ShallWe Have A Little Tall? 
CLIFFORD D. SIMAK Small Deer 
CORDWAINER SMITH Three To A Given Star 



Your Subscription Is Your Private Window On 

the stars 



Baby Is Three 
Theodore Sturgeon 

The Ballad of 
Lost C'Melf 
Cordwainor Smith 



in our galaxy 

The only thing we know about tomorrow 
is that it has its roots today. And out of the 
fantastic facts of today's scientific wonders 
Galaxy's all-star lineup of contributors weave 
stories that are sometimes wry, sometimes ter- 
rifying but always a delight to read. 

Would you like to join us, next issue and 
every issue thereafter for years to come, on 
th is fascinating exploration of the fears and 
foibles of tomorrow? All it takes is a check, a 
stamp and a minute of your time. (If you pre- 
fer not to tear the coupon out of your maga- 
zine, just give us the information requested on 
a plain piece of paper.) From then on the mails 
will bring Galaxy to your door, with the best 
stories being written by the best science-fiction 
writers of all time. 

Here are some of the famous stories that 
appeared in Galaxy in its first fifteen years. 
Will the next fifteen years be as good? 

Frankly, we don't think so. We think they'll 
be better! 



PrTTTTTTTVTTTTVTVTTrrTTTTTTTTTTVTTVTTTJ 

^Galaxy Publishing Corp. < 

^42T Hudson Street < 

New York, N.Y. 10014 ^ 

 * 

^ Yes, start my subscription to Galaxy right away, t enclose ^ 

^ my check or money order for: ^ 

 Q 12 issues for $6.00 Q 24 issues for $11.00 < 

 ^ 

^ Name 

 ^ 

^ Address . ^ 

 ^ 

City & State Zip Code ^ 

^ U.S. only. Add 10c per issue foreign postage. 4 

 Please check whether Q new or Q renewal. ^ 



The Big Time 
Fritz Leiber 

The Caves of Steel 
Isaac Asimov 

Day After Doomsday 
Poul Anderson 

The Demolished Man 
Alfred Bester 

Do i Wake or Dream? 
Frank Herbert 

The Dragon Masters 
Jack Vance 

The Fireman 
(Farenheit 4S1 ) 

Ray Bradbury 

Gravy P/aiiot 
(The Space Merchants,) 
Pohl & Kornblutb 

Here Gather the Stars 
(Way Sfafionj 
Clifford D. Simak 

Home from the Shore 
Cordon R. Dickson 

Hot Planet 
Hal Clement 

King of the City 
Keith Laumcr 

Mindswap 
Robert Sheckley 

Med Ship Man 
Murray Leinster 

The Men in the Walls 
William Tenn 

The Old Die Rich 
H. L. Gold 

The Puppet Masters 
Robert A. Hcinicin 

Surface Tension 
James Blish 

The Visitor at the Zoo 
Damon Knight 

Wind between 
the Worlds 
Lester del Rey 




oaiaocy 

MAGAZINE 

ALL STORIES NEW 



Galaxy is published in French and 
Italian. The U. S. Edition is pub- 
lished in Braille. This Edition is 
also published In Living Tape by 
Services for the Blind, Inc., Des 
Moines, Iowa. 



OCTOBER, 1965  Vd. 24, No. 1 



FREDERIK POHL 

Editor 



CONTENTS 
SERIAL  Part One 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 8 

by Frederik Pohl 

NOVELETTES 

THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 105 

by Cordwoiner Smith 



SHALL WE HAVE A LimE TALK? 172 



by Robert Sheckley 

SHORT STORIES 

INSIDE MAN 71 

by H. L. Gold 

A BETTER MOUSEHOLE 95 

by Edgar Pangborn 

SAAALL DEER 129 

by Clifford D. Simok 

THE GOOD NEW DAYS 151 

by Fritz Leiber 

FOUNDING FATHER 165 

by Isaac Asimov 

SPECIAL FEATURE 



THE AAACHINES, BEYOND SHYLOCK .. 82 



by Ray Bradbury 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 

FOR YOUR INFORMATION 84 

by Willy Ley 

FEATURES 

EDITORIAL 4 

by Frederik Pohl 

GALAXY BOOKSHELF 142 



WILLY LEY 
Science Editor 
DIANE SULLIVAN 
Associate Editor 
ROBERT M. GUINN 
Publisher 
DAVID PERTON 
Production Manager 
DAVE GEUER ASSOC. 

Advertising 
MAVIS FISHER 
Subscription Mgr. 

GALAXY MAGAZINE is published 
bi-monthly by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation. Main offices: 421 
Hudson Street, New York 14, 
N. Y. 60c per copy Subscrip- 
tion: (12 copies) $6.00 per year 
in the United States, Canada, 
Mexico, South and Central 
America and U. S. Possessions. 
Elsewhere $7.00. Second-ctass 
postage paid at New York. N.Y. 
and at additional mailing of- 
fices. Copyright New York 1965 
by Galaxy Publishing Corpora- 
tion, Robert M. Guinn, Presi- 
dent. All rights Including trans- 
lations reserved. All material 
submitted must be accompani- 
ed by self-addressed st-smped 
envelopes. The publisher as- 
sumes no responsibility (or un- 
solicited material All stories 
printed in this magazine are 
fiction and any similiarity be- 
tween characters and actual 
persons is coincidental 



by Algis Budrys 

FORECAST 171 

Cover by PEDERSON from FOUNDING FATHER 



Printed in the U.S.A. 

By The Guinn Co., Inc. N. y. 
Title Reg. U. S. Pat. Off. 



The Daj After Tom4rr<^w 



L ooking into the future of 
science fiction is tricky busi- 
ness. Any prediction is a risk. A 
prediction of what so quintessen- 
tially a predictive technique as 
the writing of science fiction may 
be like at some later date than 
this one is not merely twice as 
risky: it is folly squared. 

But it seems to us that there 
are trends. And this fifteenth an- 
niversary issue of Galaxy may be 
a good time to set a few remarks 
about them down. 

The first real science-fiction 
magazine appeared not quite for- 
ty years ago, in the spring of 
1926. It was edited by Hugo 
Gernsback and its principal sub- 
stance was the kind of stories 
Gernsback himself used to write: 
a sort of animated catalogue of 
gadgets. Granting that was what 
he did, he did it superbly, and 
as a matter of fact much of 
science fictions record of accur- 
ate predictions stems from those 
early Gernsback-type stories: ra- 
dar, television, atomic power, roc- 
kets, etc,, et al. The mixture was 
flavored with a heavy admixture 
of H, G, Wells reprints (sermons 
and polemics, beautifully writ- 
ten), and a trace of Edgar Rice 
Burroughs: and that tonic bright- 



ened the lives of lots of i)eo])le 
for nearly a decade. 

Then a man named Stanley G. 
Weinbaurn came along with a 
revolutionary idea. It was his 
thought that you could give some 
sort of three-dimensional reality 
to the characters in science-fic- 
tion stories. He was not quite so 
daring as to try it with his human 
beings, but his Martians, his Ven- 
usians and his Ganynicdan bal- 
loon-heads are still vividly -c- 
membered as persons a third of 
a century later. 

Less than a decade later Jolin 
Campbell came up with a firsli 
and fascinating mixture: write 
your stories, he told his writers, 
as though they were going to be 
printed as contemporary fiction 
in a magazine of the 22d century. 
And they did it; and they did it 
very well. L. Sprague de Camp, 
Robert A. Heinlein, Lester ilel 
Rey and any number of otliers 
responded with stories that an- in 
print on the pocketbook racks 
right now. And about ten ye.irs 
after that it was Galaxy's turn; 
and with H. L. Gold as ediior 
another new batch of ingredients 
were added. Thei.- names were wit^ 
and relevance; and they were 
compounded by writers like Roh . 



4 




Secrets 
entrusted 
to a 
few 



THERE are some things that cannot 
be generally told  things you ought to 
know. Great truths are dangerous to 
some  but factors for personal power 
and accomplishment in the hands of 
those who understand them. Behind 
the tales of the miracles and mysteries 
of the ancients, lie centuries of their 
secret probing into natures laws  
their amazing discoveries of the hid- 
den processes of mans mind, and the 
mastery of lifes problems. Once shroud- 
ed in mystery to avoid their destruc- 
tion by mass fear and ignorance, these 
facts remain a useful heritage for the 
thousands of men and women who pri- 
vately use them in their homes today. 

THIS FREE BOOK 

The Rosicrucians (not a religious 

Rosicrucians (AM( 



organization) an age-old brotherhood 
of learning, have preserved this secret 
wisdom in their archives for centu- 
ries. They now invite you to share the 
practical helpfulness of their teachings. 
Write today for a free copy of me 
book, "The Mastery of Life. Within 
its pages may lie a new life of oppor- 
tunity for you. Address; Scribe C.T.J. 

I SEND THIS COUPON , 

I Scribe C.TJ. 

The ROSICRUCIANS (AMORC) 
j San Jose, California 95114 
 Please send me the itee book. The Mastery 
I of Ufe, which explains how I may learn to 
j use my faculties and powers of mind. 



Name. 









PLEASE 


INCLUDE YOUR ZIP CODE 



SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA 95114. U.S.A. 



5 



ert Sheckley, Fritz Leiber, Alfred 
Bester, Damon Knight, the late 
C. M. Kornbluth and others  
including most of those in this 
issue 

Well, this is an attempt to look 
ahead, not a history of science 
fiction. But oversimplified and 
sketchy though what we have 
just said may be, it illustrates a 
principle. Science fiction ad- 
vances in a series of quantum 
jumps. 

It may seem to you from the 
above timetable that we are 
about due for another jump. 

It seems so to us, too; and as 
a matter of fact, we think were 
in it rig.it now. 

I XTith negligible exceptions 
'  (Wells, Stapledon and 
who?), nearly every science-fic- 
tion writer up to a very few 
years ago made one hidden  
and indefensible  assumption. 
They assumed that science 
changed; that the world chang- 
ed ; that everything you could 
imagine changed, except one 
thing. They assumed that the 
human race did not change at 
all. 

And of course the human race 
does. It has been changing from 
the day the first australopithe- 
cine picked up an antelope femur 
and broke it over a dire-wolfs 
head. It is changing now, just as 
it has throughout the human 



past; the only difference is that 
now it is changing more rapidly 
than ever before. It will be 
changing tomorrow, too; but it 
will be changing faster still. 

It is technology that is chang- 
ing us so rapidly, of course. As 
man remakes his environment he 
changes the Darwinian criteria 
of what, exactly, is fittest. Cala- 
mity criers have made much of 
the black side of this picture: we 
are breeding a race of cripples, 
they say, pointing to what mod- 
ern medicine has done to take the 
sting out of incurable genetic 
flaws. (One of the traits the hu- 
man race seems to have had for 
a good many generations is this 
same habit of preserving its un- 
fit. How many remember that 
the first Neanderthal skeleton 
gave a very erroneous picture of 
the species because it chanced to 
be that of a middle-aged man 
with an advanced case of arthrit- 
is? He could not have survived 
by himself; he had to have been 
preserved, fed and cared for. 

The interesting thing about 
technological change is that its 
rate of growth gives every sign 
of being exponential. The oldest 
computer, if it were human, 
would just barely be able to vote; 
but in rather less than a human 
generation the computers have 
firmly and irrevocably . changed 
the rate of change. Visiting the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Astrophysi- 



6 



cal Observatory the other day, 
we talked to a man named Owen 
Gingerich who, last Christmas, 
duplicated the work of Johann 
Kepler in determining the laws of 
planetary orbits. It took Kepler 
three or four years to work out 
the laws a few centuries ago. 
Last Christmas, using the same 
observed data and the same 
mathematical procedures, Ging- 
erich repeated the process in 
eight days. Eight days of his own 
human time, that is. Those eight 
days were spent merely in setting 
up the problem so that a com- 
puter could solve it; and the 
actual operating time of the com- 
puter was twelve point four sec- 
onds. 

'"T^o those who have been read- 
ing stories by, for example. 
Jack Vance and Cordwainer 
Smith in Galaxy lately, this news 
is no news. For that is what they 
and others have been writing 
about: Not you and we trans- 
planted into the world of the 
future, but the people of the 
world of the future operating on 
their own terms. Perhaps they 
will think faster and more surely 
than we (by a factor of three 
years divided by twelve point four 
seconds, for example). Perhaps 
they will have traveled so far 
from us that even computers are 
no longer relevant to their lives, 
as Vance described in The Drag 



on Masters (and in the new 
manuscript,, just in, called Tho 
Last Castle, which we will be 
bringing you before long. 

They may in fact differ from 
us in ways that we cant as yet 
guess; but what is important is 
to realize that they will differ 
from us. As John Pierce says, 
there is only one future in a tan- 
gible sense; that is, when it gets 
here there will only be the one 
single set of events that will take 
place. But our discussions of the 
future can take the form of end- 
less alternative worlds. We dont 
know which will be the true 
future  so we might as well im- 
agine as many as we can. 

Well, thats what were bend- 
ing every effort to bring you in 
Galaxys future. 

Be specific? All right. As you 
can see, Robert Sheckleys back 
with us  and to stay, it seems, 
because hes working on a batch 
of new ones for us right now. 

Cordwainer Smith is off in 
the South Pacific on an an- 
thropological expedition but 
before he left he finished Under 
Old Earth which strikes us as one 
of his best stories ever. Keith 
Laumer will be coming up again; 
so will Isaac Asimov: so will 
Robert Silverberg; so will . 

Well, thats looking far enough 
ahead. The rest of the forecast- 
ing well leave to the writers! 

 THE EDITOR 



7 




Forrester bad made his mind up. He 
was going to adjust to this mad new 
world even if it killed him  again! 



8 




PUSSYFOOT 



by FREDERIK POHL 



SERIAL 



Illustrated by WOOD 



PART ONE 



9 



I 



/^ver everyone in the room, or 
perhaps it was a park, the 
lighting cast shapes and symbols 
of color. The girl in the filmy 
gown had at one moment glitter- 
ing pink eyes, and at the next an 
aura of silvery hair. The man 
next to Forrester had golden skin 
and a mask of shadow. Wisps of 
odor drifted past him, rosebuds 
following sage. There were 
snatches of a crystalline, far-off 
music. 

"Im rich! he yelled. And 
alive! 

No one seemed to mind. For- 
rester plucked one of the color- 
less grapes Kara had recom- 
mended to him, rose, patted the 
girl in the filmy dress and 
walked unsteadily down to the 
pool where the revelers splashed 
and swam in a naked tangle. 
In spite of the long post-revival 
indoctrinatior that had given him 
so many new things and removed 
so much trash that was old, For- 
rester had not lost the habit of 
prurience. 

Its Forrester the rich man! 
one of them shouted. Forrester 
smiled and waved. A girl cried, 
Sing him a song! A song! And 
they all splashed and sang: 

Oh, he died and died and 

died  

(SPLASH) 

10 



And he cried and he cried and 
he cried  

(SPLASH) 

With his rages and his cholers 
hes a puzzle to the scholars. 
And hes got a quarter of a 
million dollars! 

Forrester! 

(SPLASH, SPLASH) 

Forrescer ducked without 
thinking, then relaxed. He al- 
lowed them to drench him with 
the warm, scented water. En- 
joy, enjoy! he cried, grinning at 
the bare bodies. Bronze and 
ivory, lean or soft, every body 
was beautiful. He knew that 
none of them would think the 
worse of him if he touched the 
two snaps at throat and waist 
and .stepped out of his clothes 
to join them. But he also knew 
that his body would not compare 
well with the Adonises, would 
not impress the full-breasted 
Venuses, and so he stayed on 
the rim. Drink and be merry, 
for yesterday we died, he called 
and squirted them at random 
with his joymaker. He didnt 
mind that he was not as beauti- 
ful as they. At least, not at this 
moment. He was happy. Nothing 
was troubling him. Not worry, 
not weariness, not fear. Not even 
his conscience; for, although he 
was wasting time, he had a right 
to waste time. 

Hara had said so. Relax. ad- 
GALAXY 



vised Hara. Get acclimated. Go 
slow. Youve been dead a long 
time. Forrester was well content 
to follow his advice. In the morn- 
ing he would take things serious- 
ly. In the morning he would go 
out into this world and make a 
place for himself. With unas- 
suming pride he thought that he 
would do this not because he 
really needed to, for he had that 
quarter of a million dollars all 
right, but because it was proper 
that he should work and earn 
joy. He would be a good citizen. 

Experimentally he shouted 
what he thought of as a friendly 
obscene suggestion to one of the 
girls (although Hara had said 
that the talk of this time con- 
tained no obscenities). In return 
she made a charming gesture, 
which Forrester tried to think .of 
as an obscene one, and her com- 
paiiion, stretched out at the edge 
of the pool, drowsily lifted his 
joymaker and drenched Forrest- 
er with a tingling spray that, 
startlingly, brought him to an 
instant thrill of sexual excite- 
ment and then left him replete 
and momentarily exhausted. 

What a delightful way to live, 
Forrester thought. He turned and 
walked away, followed by song: 

And he slept and he slept 
and he slept. 

And he wept and he wept 
and he wept  



Is he damning? Is he doom- 
ing? 

For that matter, is he hu- 
man? 

Forrester! 

But he was too far away for 
them to splash him now, and he 
had seen someone he wanted to 
talk to. 

It was a girl. She had just 
come in and was still rather 
sober. She was alone. And she 
was quite as tall as Forrester 
himself. 

Hara would introduce him if 
asked, Forrester knew, since this 
was more or less Haras party. 
But he did not at that moment 
see Hara. Didnt need Hara, 
either, he decided. He walked 
up to the girl and touched her 
on the arm. 

I am Charles D. Forrester, 
he said. I am six hundred and 
twenty-six old. I have a quarter 
of a million dollars. This is my 
first day out of the sleep-freeze, 
and I would appreciate it if you 
would sit down and talk to me 
for a while, or kiss me. 

Certainly, she said, taking 
his hand. Lets lie down here 
on the violets. Careful of my 
joymaker; its loaded with some- 
thing special. 

TTalf an hour later Hara came 
by and found them, lying 
on their backs, each with an arm 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



11 



under the other, heads inclined 
toward each other. 

Forrester noticed him at once, 
but went on talking to the girl. 
They had been plucking and 
eating the glass-clear grapes 
from a vine over their heads. The 
intoxicating fruit, the occasion 
and his general sense of well be- 
ing combined to erase social ob- 
ligations from his mind. Any- 
way, Hara would understand and 
forgive any offense. Dont mind 
him, dear, Forrester said to the 
girl. You were telling me not 
to sign up as a donor. 

Or as game. A lot of green- 
horns fall for that, because the 
moneys good. But the way they 
get you is that you dont figure 
what it will cost in the long 
run. 

Thats very interesting, said 
Forrester, then sighed, looked 
away from the girl and nodded 
up at Hara. You know, flara, 
he said, youre a drag. 

And youre a drunk, said 
Hara. Hello, Tip. You two seem 
to be getting on well enough. 
Hes nice, the girl said. Of 
course, youre nice too, Tip. Is it 
time for the champagne wine? 
Well past. Thats why I came 
looking for you. I went to a lot 
of trouble to get this champagne 
wine for the party, and Forrester 
will damn well get up and drink 
some to show the rest of us how 
its done. 



You tilt, said Forrester, and 
you pour. 

Hara looked at him more 
carefully, shook his head and 
fingered his joymaker. Dont 
you remember anything I tell 
you? he chided, and sprayed 
Forrester with what felt for a 
moment like an invigorating, and 
not at all shocking, ice-cold 
shower. Not too drunk tonight. 
Get adjusted. Do what I tell 
you, will you? And now lets see 
about this champagne wine. 

Forrester got up like an obed- 
ient child and trailed after Hara 
toward the dispensing tables, one 
arm around the girl. She had pale 
hair, up in a fluffy crown, and the 
tricks of the lighting made it 
look as though fireflies nested in 
it. 

In the event that he ever saw 
Dorothy again, Forrester 
thought, he might have to give 
this sort of thing up. But for the 
time being it was very pleasant. 
And reassuring. It was hard for 
him to remember, when he had 
an arm around a pretty girl, that 
ninety days before his body had 
been a cryogenic crystal in an 
ambience of liquid helium, with 
his heart stopped and his brain 
still and his lungs a clot of de- 
stroyed scar tissue. 

He popped the cork of the 
champagne like a good fellow, 
toasted and drank. He had never 
seen the label before, but it was 



12 



GALAXY 



champagne all right. At Haras 
request he roared the verses of 
The Bastard King of England 
amid much applause, and would 
not let anyone sober him though 
he knew he was beginning again 
to reel and stammer. You de- 
cadent sods, he bellowed am- 
iably, you know so much! But 
you dont know how to get 
drunk. 

They were dancing, a linlisd 
circle of all tv/enty-odd of them 
with foot-stamping and sudden 
changes of direction, a little like 
a Morris dance, a little like a 
Paul Jones, to music like pizzi- 
cato cello and the piping of 
flutes. The girl cried, Oh, 
Charles! Charles Forrester! You 
almost make an Arcadian of 
me! He nodded and grinned and 
clung to her on his right, and to 
a huge creature in orange tights 
on his left, a man who, some- 
one said, had just returned from 
Mars and was stumbling and 
straining in Earths gravity. But 
he was laughing. Everyone was 
laughing. A lot of them seemed 
to be laughing at Forrester, per- 
haps at his clumsy attempts to 
follow the step. 

That was almost the last he 
remembered. There was some 
shouting about what to do with 
him, a proposal to sober him up, 
a veto, a long giggling debate 
while he nodded happily like a 
whiskered head on a spring. He 



did not know when the paity 
ended. He had a dreamlike 
memory of the girl leading aim 
across an empty way bet\\'een 
tall, dark structures like monu- 
ments, while he shouted and sang 
to the echoes. He remembered 
kissing the girl, and some vag- 
rant aphrodisiac wisp from her 
joymaker that filled him with a 
confused emotion of mingled de- 
sire and fear. But he did not re- 
member returning to bis room 
or going to sleep. 

And when he woke In the 
morning he was buoyant, rested, 
vigorous and alone. 

II 

'"T^he bed in which Forrester 
woke was oval, springy and 
gently warm. It woke him by 
purring faintly at him, soothing- 
ly and cheerfully. Then as he 
began to stir the purring stopped, 
and the surface beneath his body 
gently began to knead his 
muscles. Lights came on. There 
was a distant sound of lively 
music, like a Gypsy trio. For- 
rester stretched, yawned, ex- 
plored his teeth with his tongue 
and sat up. 

Good morning, Man Forres- 
ter, said the bed. It is eight- 
fifty hours and you have an ap- 
pointment at nine seventy-five. 
Would you like me to tell you 
your calls? 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



13 



Not now, said Forrester at 
once. Hara had told him about 
the bed. It did not startle him. 
It was a convenience, not a 
threat. It was one more com- 
fortable part of this very amiable 
world. 

Forrester, who had been thirty- 
seven years old when he was 
burned to death and still con- 
sidered that to be his age, lit a 
cigarette, considered his situation 
carefully and decided that it was 
a state unmatched by any other 
thirty-seven year old man in 
the history of the world. He had 
it made. Life. Health. Good 
company. And a quarter of a mil- 
lion dollars. 

He was not, of course, as 
unique as he thought. But as he 
had not yet fully accepted the 
fact that he had himself been 
dead and was now returned to 
life, much less that there were 
millions upon millions like him, 
it ielt unique. It felt very good. 

I have just received another 
message for you, Man Forrester, 
said the bed. 

Save it, said Forrester. Af- 
ter I have a cup of coffee. 

Do you wish me to send you 
a cup of coffee, Man Forrester? 

Youre a nag, you know that? 
Ill tell you what I want and 
when I want it. 

What Forrester really wanted, 
although he had not articulated 
it even to himself, was to go on 



enjoying for a moment the sen- 
sation of being uncommitted. It 
was like a liberation. It was like 
that first week of basic training, 
in the Army, when he realized 
that there was a hard way to get 
through this hitch and an easy 
one, and that the easy one, which 
entailed making no decisions of 
his own and taking no iniciative, 
but merely doing what he was 
told, was like nothing so much 
as a rather prolonged holiday in 
a somewhat poorly equipped 
summer camp for adults. 

Here the accommodations 
were in fact sumptuous. But the 
principle was the same. He did 
not have to concern himself with 
obligations. He had no obliga- 
tions. He didnt have to worry 
about making sure the kids got 
up for school, because he no 
longer had any children. He 
didnt have to think about 
whether his wife had enough 
money to get through the day, 
because he didnt now have a 
wife. If he wanted to, ha could 
now roll over, pull the covers 
over his head and go to sleep. 
No one would stop him. no one 
would be aggrieved. If he chose, 
he could get drunk, attempt the 
seduction of a girl or write a 
poem. All of his debts were paid 
 or forgiven, centuries since. 
Every promise was redeemed  
or had passed beyond the chance 
of redemption. The lie he had 



14 



GALAXY 



told Dorothy about that week- 
end in 1962 need trouble him no 
longer. If the truth now came 
out, no one would care; and it 
wa.s all but impossible that the 
truth should ever come out. 

He had, in short, a blank 
check on life. 

More than that, he had a pret- 
ty substantially underwritten 
guarantee of continuing life it- 
self. He wasnt sick. He wasnt 
even threatened; even the lump 
on his leg, which he had once or 
twice gazed on with some worry 
in the days before 'nis death, 
could not be malignant or threat- 
ening, for if it were the doctors 
at the dormer would have fixed 
it. He need not even worry about 
being run over by a car  if 
there were cars  since at worst 
that might mean only another 
few centuries in the Oath of 
liquid helium, and then back to 
life  better than ever! 

He had, in fact, everytliing he 
had ever wished for. 

The only things he didnt have 
were those he had not wished 
for because he already had them 
. e.g., family. Friends. Status. 

In this life of the year 2527 
A.D., Charles Forrester was en- 
tirely free. But he was not so 
joyous as to be blinded to the 
fact that this coin of his treasure 
had two sides. Another way of 
looking at it was that he was 
entirely superfluous. 



Tan Forrester, said the 
bed, I must insist. I 
have both an urgent- class mes- 
sage and a personal-visit not- 
ice. And the mattress curled un- 
der him, humped itself and de- 
posited him on the floor of the 
room. 

Staggering, Forrester growled, 
Whats urpnt? 

A hunting license has been 
taken out on you, Man Forres- 
ter. The licensee is Heinzlichen 
Jura de Syrtis Major, male, dip- 
ara-Zen, Utopian, eighty-six 
elapsed, six feet four inches im- 
port-export. He is extraterres- 
trial-human. No reason declared. 
Bonds and guaranties have been 
posted. Would you like your 
coffee now? 

While the bed was speaking it 
had been rolling itself into a wall. 
It disappeared into a sphincter 
that closed and left no trace. It 
was disconcerting, but Forrester 
remembered Haras instructions, 
searched for and found his joy- 
maker, and said to it; I would 
like my breakfast now. Ham and 
eggs. Toast and orange juice. 
Coffee, and a pack of cigar- 
ettes. 

They will be delivered in five 
minutes, Man Forrester, said 
the joymaker. May I give you 
the rest of your messages? 

Wait a minute. I thought it 
was the bed that was giving me 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



15 



We are all the same, Man 
Forrester. Your messages follow: 
Notice of personal visit: Taiko 
Hironibi will join you for break- 
fast. Dr. Hara has prescribed a 
euphoric in case of need, which 
will be delivered with your 
breakfast. Adne Bensen sends 
you a kiss. First Merchants Audit 
Be Trust invites your patronage. 
Society of Ancients states you 
have been approved for mem- 
bership and relocation benefits. 
Ziegler, Durant and Colfax, at- 
tornies   

You can skip the commer- 
cials. What was that about a 
hunting license? 

A hunting license has been 
taken out on you, Man Forres- 
ter. The licensee is Heinzlichen 
Jura de   

You said that. Wait a min- 
ute. Forrester regarded his joy- 
maker thoughtfully. The prin- 
ciple of it was clear enough. It 
was a remote input-output sta- 
tion for a shared-time computer 
program, with certain attach- 
ments which functioned as 
pocket flask, first-aid kit, cos- 
metic bag and so on. It looked 
something like a mace, or a jes- 
ters scepter. Forrester told him- 
self that it was really no less 
natural to talk to something like 
a mace than it was to talk into 
something like a telephone. But 
at the other end of a telephone 
had been a human being ... or 



at least, he reminded himself, 
the taped voice of what at one 
time had been a human being 
. anyway, it didnt feel nat- 
ural. He said guardedly: I 

dont understand all this. I dont 
know who these people are who 
are calling me up, either. 

Man Forrester, the personal 
callers are as follows. Taiko Hir- 
onibi: Male, dendritic Confucian, 
Arcadian, fifty-one elapsed, six 
feet one inch, organizer, business 
political. He will bring his ow.n 
breakfast. Adne Bensen: Female, 
Universalist, Arcadian-trimmer, 
twenty-three declared, five feet 
seven inches, experiencer-homes- 
woman, no business stated. Her 
kiss follows. 

Forrester did not know what 
to expect but was pleasantly 
ready for anything. 

What he got was indeed a kiss. 
It was disconcerting. No kissing 
lips were visible. There was a 
hint of perfumed breath, then a 
pressure on his lips  warm and 
soft, moist and sweet. 

Startled, he touched his 
mouth. How the devil did you 
do that? he shouted. 

Sensory stimulation through 
the tactile net, Man Forrester. 
Will you receive Taiko Hiron- 
ibi? 

Well, said Forrester, frank- 
ly I dont know. Oh, hell. I guess 
so. Send him in . Wait a min- 
ute. Shouldnt I get dressed? 



16 



GALAXY 



Do you wish other rhjth'njj, 
Man Forrester? 

Dont confuse me. Just nc-ld 
on a minute, he said, rattled 
and angry. He thought for a 
minute. I dont know who this 
Hirowhatsis is   

Taiko Hironibi, Man For- 
rester. Male, dendritic Confuc- 
ian   

Cut that out! Forrester was 
breathing hard. Abruptly the 
joymaker in his hand hissed and 
sprayed him with something that 
f( It damp for a second, then dis- 
sipated. 

Forrester felt himself relaxing. 

Oh, God, he said, what do 
I care who he is? Go ahead. 
Send him in. And get a move on 
with my breakfast, will you? 

tt'V/'oull do! cried Taiko 
Hironibi. The greatest! 
What a cranial index! You look, 
cripes, I dont know what to 
call it, you look like a brain. But 
a swinger. 

Charles Forrester, gravely and 
cheerfully, indicated a seat with 
his hand. Sit down. I dont 
know what you want but Im 
willing to talk about it. He was 
pretty sure that the joymaker 
had given him some kind of a 
tranquilizer, but he didnt mind. 
Sit down, Taiko, he said. 
Youre the damnedest looking 
Japanese I ever saw. 

Really? The man looked 



disconcerted. He also looked 
quite non- Japanese: crew-cut 

golden hair, blue eyes. They 
change you around so, he said 
apologetically. Maybe I used to 
look different. Say! Did I get 
here first? 

You got here before my 
breakfast even. 

Great! Thats really great. 
Now, heres the thing. Were all 
messed up here, you have to 
get that straight right away. The 
people are .sheep. They know 
theyre being expropriated, but 
do they do anything about it? 
Sweat, no, they sit back and en- 
joy it. Thats what were for m 
the Ned Lud Society. I lont 
know your politics, Charley   

I used to be a Democrat, 
mostly. 

  Well, you can forget that. 
It doesnt matter. Im registered 
Arcadian myself, of cour^, but 
a lot of guys are Trimmers, 
maybe   he winked  maybe 
even something a little worse, 
you know? Were all in this 
together. Affects everybody. If 
you raise your kids with ma- 
chines youre bound to have ma- 
chine-lovers growing up, right? 
Now 

Hey! said Forrester, losking 
at his wall. At a point as near as 
he could remember just about 
where the bed had disappeared, 
a sphincter was opening again. 
It disgorged a table set for two. 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



17 



one side bearing his breakfast, 
the other a complete setting but 
no food. 

Ah, breakfast, said Taiko 
Hironibi. He opened a pouch in 
the kilt-like affair he wore and 
took out a small capped bowl, 
a plastic box which turned out 
to contain something like 
crackers and a globe which, 
squeezed, poured a hot, watery, 
greenish tea into the cup at ais 
place. Care for a pickled 
plum? he asked politely, re- 
moving the cap from the bowl. 

Forrester shook his head. 
Chairs had appeared beside the 
table, and he slid into the one 
placed before the ham and eggs. 

Next to the steaming plate was 
a small crystal tray containing 
a capsule and a scrap of golden 
paper on which was written ; 

I dont know about that 
champagne wine. Take this if 
you have a hungover. 

Hara 

To the best of Forresters 
knowledge he didnt have a hang- 
over, but the capsule looked 
too good to waste. He swallowed 
it with some of the orange juice 
and at once felt even more re- 
laxed. If that were possible. He 
felt positively affectionate to- 
ward the blond Japanese, now 
decorously nibbling at a dark, 
withered object. 



It crossed Forresters mind 
that the capsule, plus what the 
joymaker had sprayed him witli, 
might add up to something larg- 
er than he was ready for. He felt 
almost giddy. Better guard 
against that, he thought, and de- 
manded as unpleasantly as he 
could: Who sent you here? 

Why  the contact was Adne 
Bensen. 

Dont know her, snapped 
Forrester, trying not to grin. 

You dont? Taiko stopped 
eating, dismayed. Sweat, man, 
she told me youd be   

Doesnt matter, cried For- 
rester, and prepared for the kill- 
ing question he had been saving. 
Just tell me this. Whats the 
advantage of my joining your 
society? 

The blond man was clearly 
disgruntled. Listen, Im not 
begging you. We got something 
good here. You want in, come 
in. You want out, go. 

No, dont give me an argu- 
ment. Just answer the question. 
Forre,ster managed to light a cig- 
arette, puffed smoke in Taikos 
face. For instance, he said, 
would it be money thats in- 
volved? 

Well, sure. Everybody needs 
money, right? But thats not the 
only thing   

Forrester said, politely but 
severely, restraining the impulse 
to giggle: You know, I had an 



18 



GALAXY 



idea it would be like that. Well, 
thanks. You better be going 
now, Hironibi. Ill think over 
what you said and maybe we 
can get together some time. But 
dont you call me. Let me call 
you. And he bowed Taiko to 
the door and watched it close 
behind him, face straight until 
the Japanese was gone. 

Then Forrester bent over and 
howled with laughter. Come 
man! he shouted. Think Im 
an easy mark! 

I do not understand, Man 
Forrester, said the joymaker. 
Are you addressing me? 

Not in this life, Forrester 
told the machine, still chuck- 
ling. He might look like a coun- 
try cousin, but there was one 
sharper who had got no farther 
than first base. 

He wondered who this Adne 
Bensen was, who had fingered 
him for the swindler and sent 
him an electronic kiss. If she 
kissed in person like she kissed 
through sensory stimulation of 
the tactile net she might be 
worth knowing. And no problem, 
either. If Taiko was the worst 
this century could turn up, For- 
rester thought with pleasure and 
joy, his quarter of a million dol- 
lars was safe! 

'T'wenty minutes later he found 
his way to the street level 
of the building, not without ar- 



guments from this joymaker. 
Man Porrester, it said, sound- 
ing almost aggrieved, it is bet- 
ter to take a taxi! Do not walk. 
The guaranties do not apply to 
provocation and contributory 
neghgence. 

Shut up for a minute, will 
you? Forrester managed to get 
the door open and looked out. 

The city of 2527 A.D. was very 
lafge, very fast-moving and very 
noisy. Forrester was standing in 
a sort of driveway, a clump of 
ethereal, thirty-foot-high ferns 
in front of him partially making 
a twelve-lane highway packed to 
its margins with high-speed 
traffic in both directions. Occas- 
ionally a vehicle would cut in 
to the entrance to his building, 
pause before him for a moment 
and then move on. Taxis? For- 
rester wondered. If so, he was 
giving them no encouragem^t. 

Man Forrester, said the joy- 
maker, I have summoned 
death-reversal equipment but it 
will not arrive for several min- 
utes. I must warn you the costs 
may be challenged under the 
bonding regulations. 

Oh, shut up. It seemed to 
be a warm day, and Forrester 
was perhaps still slightly befud- 
dled; the temptation to walk was 
irresistible. All questions could be 
deferred. Should be deferred, he 
told himself. Obviously his first 
task was to get himself oriented. 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



19 



And  he prided himself  he had 
been something of a cosmopoli- 
tan, back in those days before 
his death, as at home in San 
Francisco or Montreal as in New 
York or Chicago. And he had al- 
ways made time to stroll around 
a city 

He would .itroll this one now 
Joymakers be damned, thought 
Charles Forrester, right-faced, 
hooked the joymaker to his belt 
and set off along a narrow pe- 
destrian walk 

There were very few walkers 
It didnt do to . lake snap judg- 
ments, Forrester thought, but 
these people seemed soft. Per- 
haps they could afford to be. No 
doubt someone like himself, he 
considered soberly, seemed like 
a hairy troglodyte, crude, savage 
and flint-axed. 

Man Forrester, cried the 
joymaker from his belt, I must 
inform you that Heinzlichen 
Jura de Syrtis Major has waived 
protest of the bonding regula- 
tions. The death-reversal equip- 
ment is on its way. He slapped 
it and it w'a^ quiet, or if it con- 
tinued to bleat at him it was 
drowned out by the sound of the 
clamoring traffic. Whatever 
drove these cars it was not gas- 
oline. There were no fumes. 
There was only a roar of air and 
singing tires, multiplied by hun- 
dreds and unending. The traffic- 
way lay between tall, bright 



buildings, one a soft, glowing 
orange, one the crystalline blue- 
gray coloi of fractured steel. In 
the court of a building across 
the trafficway he could see, 
dimly through the glass and the 
momentary gaps in the traffic, 
a dot of plant growth with 
enormous scarlet fruits On a 
balcony above him scented foun- 
tains played. 

The joymaker was addressing 
him again, but he could only 
catch art Oi it.   on station 
now, Man Forrester. A shadow 
passed over him and he looked 
up. 

Overhead a white aircraft of 
some sort  it had no wings  was 
sliding diagonally down toward 
him. 

It bore a glittering ruby 
insigne like the serpent staff of 
Aesculapius on its sides. The 
nearer end of it was all glass 
and exposed, and inside a young 
woman in crisply tailored blue 
was drowsily watching something 
on a screen invisible to Forrester. 
She looked up, gazed at him, 
spoke into a microphone, glanced 
at him again and went back to 
watching her screen. The vehicle 
took position over his head and 
waited, following with him as ne 
walked. 

Thats funny, said Forrester 
aloud. 

Its a funny world, said 
somebody quite near him. 



20 



GALAXY 



T Te turned around. Four men 
-* -* were standing there, looking 
at him with pleasant, open ex- 
pressions. One of them was very 
tall and very heavy. In fact, he 
was gross. He leaned on a cane, 
studying Forrester, his expres- 
sion alert and interested. 

Forrester realized that he was 
the one who had spoken and, 
in the same moment, realized 
that he knew him. Oh, sure, he 
said. The Martian in orange 
tights. 

Very good, said the Mar- 
tian, nodding. He was not in or- 
ange tightr now; he wore a loose 
white tunic and slate-gray shorts. 
He wasnt really a Martian, 
Forrester remembered; at least, 
his ancestors had come from 
Earth. 

One of the other men took 
Forresters hand and shook it. 
Youre the one with a quarter 
of a million dollars, he said. 
Look me up when this is all 
over. Id like to know what a 
fellow like you thinks of our 
world. 

He brought his knee up and 
kicked Forrester in the groin. 
Hard. 

Forrester felt the world ex- 
plode, starting inside him. He 
saw that the man was stepping 
back, looking at him with inter- 
est and pleasure; but it was hard 
to watch him because the city 
was moving. It tilted up at an 



angle and the sidewalk struck 
him on the forehead. He rolled, 
clutching at his testicles, and 
found himself looking upward. 

The man from Mars said con- 
versationally, Dont hurry. 
Plenty of time for everybody. 
He lifted his cane and limped 
forward. It was quite an effort 
for him in Earths gravity, after 
Mars, Forrester saw. The cane 
came down on his shoulder and 
upper arm, was lifted and came 
down again, regularly, slowly 
and strongly. It must have been 
weighted. It felt like a baseball 
bat. 

The pain in Forresters gut was 
like death. His arm was numb. 

All in all, though, he realized 
quite clearly  unable to move, 
watching as they passed the cane 
from hand to hand and the white 
aircraft hovered overhead, the 
womans face peering patiently 
dovm  all in all, it was hurting 
rather less than he might have 
expected. Perhaps it was Haras 
hungover medicine. Perhaps it 
was just shock. 

He tried to speak, but his 
lungs were not working. 

He saw that someone was run- 
ning toward them, someone with 
a black face under a green beret, 
but he could not keep his eyes 
open. 

He could not quite lose con- 
sciousness either, though he 
wanted to very much. Perhaps 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



21 



that was Haras euphoric pill too. 
Then he felt that he was suc- 
ceeding. The pain in his belly 
grew/ alarmingly, and began to 
recede again, and then felt 
nothing at all, or nothing phys- 
ical. 

But there was something pain- 
ful in his mind, something th.at 
whimpered. Why? Why me? 

Ill 

TTowls of laughter rolled over 
Forrester. A girl was scream- 
ing, Hes spinning it! Hes spin- 
ning it! Gee. I think I saw the 
cartridge! 

Forrester opened his eyes. He 
was in something that lurched 
and hummed. A girl in a tailored 
blue suit, her back to him, was 
staring at what seemed to be a 
window opening on a sort of are- 
na, where the screaming girl, face 
flushed and happy, stamping 
with excitement, was standing 
over a blindfolded man with a 
gun. 

Forresters aches and bruises 
reminded him at once of what 
had happened. He was surprised 
that he was still alive. He croak- 
ed, Hey! 

The girl in the tailored blue 
looked over her shoulder at him. 
Youre all right, she said. Just 
take it easy. Well be there in a 
minute. 

Where? 



Impatiently she moved her 
hand. The arena with the man 
and girl disappeared  just as 
the man seemed to be raising the 
gun  and Forrester found him- 
self looking at blue sky and 
.iouds Lift up a little, the girl 
in blue said. Youll see it. 
There. 

Forrester tried to raise himself 
on an elbow, caught a glimpse of 
trees and rambling pastel build- 
ings and fell back. I cant lift 
myself up! Damn it, Ive been 
half killed. He became aware 
that he was on a sort of stretcher, 
and that there was another one 
beside him. The other one was 
also occupied, by someone with 
a sheet over him. Whos that? 
he cried. 

How would I know? I just 
bring them in, I dont write their 
life stories. Now relax or Ill have 
to put you to sleep. 

You silly bitch, said Forrest- 
er precisely. Im not going to 
stand for this. I demand that 
you  Wait a minute! What are 
you doing? 

The girl had turned around, 
and she was holding something 
very like his joymaker, pointed 
at him. Are you going to shut 
up and lie still? 

I warn you! Dont you dare! 

She sighed and something cool 
touched his face. 

Forrester gathered all his 
strength to tell her what he 



22 



GALAXY 



thought of her, her probable sex 
life and this world of hers, in 
which arbitrary and unpleasant 
things were done to well to do 
men like himself. He couldnt. All 
that came out was, Arr, a-r-r-r. 
He was not unconscious, but he 
was very weak. 

The girl said, You weep me, 
greenie. You are a greenhorn, 
arent you? I can always tell. 
You people wake up in the dor- 
mer and you tliink youre Gods 
own sweat. Mother! Sure youre 
alive. Sure youve had the biggest 
break you can imagine. But do 
you think we care? 

All this time the aircraft was 
slipping and turning, coming in 
for a landing. The girl, who one 
would have thought to be the 
pilot, paid no attention. She was 
very cross. She said, Now, I 
know my job, and my job is to 
keep you alive, or keep you 
safely dead till they can take 
care of you. I dont have to talk 
to you. 

Forrester said, A-r-r-r. 

I dont even like you, she 
said with vexation, and youve 
made me miss my favorite pro- 
gram. Oh, go to sleep. 

And she raised the joymaker 
again, just as Forrester felt the 
aircraft touch ground, and he did. 

^ t the temperature of liquid 
helium chemistry stops. 

On this fact, and one reason- 



able hope, the largest industry 
of the late twentieth century had 
been built. 

The reasonable hope was that 
the progress of medicine in past 
years would be matched by simi- 
lar progress in the future  so 
that no matter what a person 
might die of, at some future time 
a way would be found to cure it, 
to repair it, or at least to make 
it irrelevant to continuing life 
and activity. (Including a meth- 
od of repairing the damage due 
to freezing to that temperature.) 

The fact was that freezing 
stopped time. 

And the industry was Immor- 
tality, Inc. 

In the city of Shoggo in which 
Forrester had awakened, a city 
which was nearly nine hundred 
years old and enormous, a thou- 
sand acres of park along a lake- 
front had humped themselves 
into a hill. All around was flat. 
The hill itself was an artifact. 
It was, as a matter of fact, the 
freezing center for that part of 
the world. 

A hundred and fifty million 
cubic yards of earth had been 
eaten out of the ground to make 
a cold-storage locker for people. 
When the locker was built, most 
of the dirt was heaped back on 
top of it for insulation. 

The differential in temperature 
between ground level and the 
heart of the frozen hill was near- 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



23 



ly five hundred degrees, Fahren- 
heit, or three hundred and more 
in the Kelvin scale on which the 
dormer operated. 

When Forrester realized where 
the white aircraft had taken him 
he was instantly submerged in a 
terror he could not express. Be- 
ginning to awaken, he was still 
terribly weak, as though one of 
those sprays from the girls joy- 
maker had shorted out ninety per 
cent of his volitional muscle con- 
trol. (As in fact it had) He saw 
the bright featureless ceiling ov- 
erhead and heard the moan and 
click of the thousand frightening 
instruments that brought people 
back to life, and fugued into a 
terrifying certainty that they 
were going to freeze him again. 
He lay there, groaning inarticu- 
lately, while things were done to 
him. 

But they were not freezing 
him. 

They were just patching him 
up. The blood was washed away. 
The bruises were scrubbed with 
something metallic, then touched 
with a transparent stiff jelly in 
a long silvery tube that looked 
something like a large lipstick. 
His left thigh was pressed for a 
moment between two glowing 
screens which he knew to be a 
sort of X-ray, and a fine wash 
of something that glistened wet 
and dark was painted over his 
heart. 



This last thing made him feel 
better, whatever it was. He found 
that he was able to speak. 

Thank you, he said. 

The young-looking, red-faced 
man who was working over him 
at that moment nodded casual- 
ly, touched Forresters navel with 
the end of a silvery probe, 
glanced at it and said, All right, 
I guess were through with you. 
Get up and lets see if you can 
walk to Haras office. 

Forrester swung his legs out 
of the sort of low-walled crib he 
was in and found he could walk 
as well as ever. Even his bruises 
didnt hurt, or not much, al- 
though already he could detect 
what seemed to be the beginning 
return of pain. 

The red-faced man said, 
Youre fine. Stay out of here for 
a while, will you? And dont for- 
get to see Hara, because youre 
in some kind of trouble. He 
turned away as Forrester started 
to ask questions. How would 
I know what kind? Just go see 
Hara. 

A slim green arrowhead skip- 
ped along the floor ahead 
of him, guiding him to Haras of- 
fice, but actually Forrester 
thought he could have found it 
without the guide that had been 
provided. Once he left the emer- 
gency rooms he was in the part 
of the dormer he remembered. 



24 



GALAXY 




Here he had wakened out of a 
frozen sleep that lasted half 
a milennium. There he had gone 
every day for a week for bath- 
ing in some sort of light, warm 
oil that had vibrated and tingled, 
and made him feel drowsy but 
stronger each day. It was on the 
level below this that he had done 
his exercises, and in the building 
across the bed of poinsettias (ex- 
cept that these poinsettias were 
bright gold) that he had slept. 

He wondered what had be- 
come of the rest of what he 
thought of as his graduating class. 
The thawed Lazaruses were pro- 
cessed in batches  fifty at a 
clip, at least in his group  and 
although he had not spent much 



time with any of them there was 
something about this shared ex- 
perience that had made him 
know them quickly. 

But when they were discharg- 
ed they all went in separate direc- 
tions, apparently for policy rea- 
sons. Forrester regretted they had 
lost touch. 

Then he laughed out loud. A 
blue-jacketed woman, walking 
toward him along the haU and 
talking into an instrument on 
her wrist, looked up at him with 
curiosity and faint contempt. 
Sorry, he said to her, still 
chuckling, as the green beacon 
of light turned a corner and he 
followed He didnt doubt he 
looked peculiar. He felt peculiar. 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



25 



He was missing these fellow- 
graduates of the freezatorium 
with the fond, distant detach- 
ment of his high-school class. Yet 
it was less than forty-eight hours 
since he had been with them. 

A busy forty-eight hours, he 
thought. A bit frightening, too. 
Even wealth was not as secure a 
buffer against this world as he 
had thought. 

The flickering green light led 
him into Haras office and disap- 
peared. 

Hara was standing at the door, 
waiting for him. Damned 
kamikaze, he said amiably, 
cant I trust you out of my sight 
for a minute? 

Forrester, who had never been 
a demonstrative man, seized his 
hand and shook it. Jesus, Im 
glad to see you! Im mixed up. I 
dont know what the hell is go- 
ing on, and   

Just stay out of trouble, will 
you? Sit down. Hara made a 
seat come out of the wall, and 
a bottle out of his desk. He 
thumbed the cork expertly and 
poured a drink for Forrester, say- 
ing, I expected you under your 
own power this morning, you 
know. Not in a DR cart. Didnt 
the center warn you somebody 
was after you? 

Positively not! Forrester was 
both startled and indignant. 
What do you mean, after me? I 
had no idea   



Tlien tardily recollection dawn- 
ed. Unless, he finished thought- 
fully, thats what the joymaker 
was mumbling about. It was all 
about bonds and guaranties and 
somebody named Heinz-some- 
thing of Syrtis Major. Thats on 
Mars, isnt it? Say. Recognition 
hardily dawned. 

Heinzlichen Jura de Syrtis 
Major, Hara supplied, toasting 
Forrester with his glass and tak- 
ing a tiny sip of the drink. For- 
rester followed suit; it was cham- 
pagne. Hara sighed and said, I 
dont know, Charlie, but I dont 
think Ill acquire a taste for this 
stuff after all. 

Never mind that! The Mar- 
tian! The fellow in orange tights! 
Hes the one who beat me up, 
he and his gang! 

Hara looked faintly puzzled. 
Why, of course. 

And then, said Forrester, 
working it out in his mind, there 
was this colored fellow. I mean, 
Negro. I guess he was a Negro 
 Anyway, he came along. 
There was, said Hara, an- 
other man brought in. with you. 
Lets see. Graphite-gray. Hair, 
black, kinked. Eyes brown. Is 
that what you mean? 

Sure. I think he was trying 
to help me. 

Oh, Hara said, theres no 
doubt of that. Messed things up 
for fair, he did. Hes in the freez- 
er now. They killed him. Nitro- 



26 



GALAXY 



gen batch  were just holding 
him until we get parts. Theres 
a compatibility problem, so it 
might be a week or two . 

Killed him? 

Forrester tipped up his ruby- 
crystal glass and drained the 
champagne  heaven knevi; where 
Hara had found it, after Forres- 
ter had mentioned it as one of 
the great goods of the past  
and it was by no means appro- 
priate to the occasion. It tickled 
his nose. 

But at least it contained al- 
cohol, which Forrester felt he 
needed. 

He said humbly, Please ex- 
plain what happened. 

Sweat, Charles, where do I 
start? What did you do to Hen- 
zie? 

Nothing! I mean  well, 
nothing, really. I might have 
stepped on his feet when we were 
dancing. 

Hara said angrily, A Mars- 
man? You stepped on his feet?" 

Whats so bad about that? I 
mean, even if I did. Im not sure 
I did. Would you blow your stack 
about something like that? 

Mars isnt Shoggo, Hara 
said patiently, and anyway, 
maybe I would. Depends. Did 
you read your orientation book? 

Huh?' 

The book of information 
about the year 2527. You got it 
when you were discharged here. 



Forrester searcned his mem- 
ory. Oh, that. Maybe I left it 
at the party. 

Well, that computes, Hara 
said with some disgust. I mean 
figures. Ill see you get another 
one. Meanwhile, will you please 
try to bear in mind, first, that 
youre sort of my responsibility, 
second, that you dont know your 
way around? Ill see you get an- 
other copy of the book. Read 
it! Come back and see me tomor- 
row; Ive got work to do now. 
On your way out stop at the 
discharge office and pick up your 
stuff. 

He escorted Forrester to the 
door, turned, then paused. 

Oh. Adne Bensen sends re- 
gards. Nice girl. She likes you, 
he said, closed the door and was 
gone. 

F orrester completed his pro- 
cessing and was released by 
the medical section, receiving as 
he left a neat white folder with 
his name imprinted in gold. 

It contained four sets of docu- 
ments. One was a sheaf of medi- 
cal records, a second the book 
Hara had mentioned, slim and 
bronze-bound, with the title 
printed in luminous letters: 

Your Guide to the 26th Century 
(1970-1990 Edition) 

A third was what seemed to 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



27 



be a legal paper of some kind. 
At least, it was backed with a 
sheet of stiff blue material that 
gave it the look of a subpoena. 
Forrester remembered that the 
doctor who had patched him up 
had spoken of trouble. This look- 
ed like being the trouble, al- 
though the words were either un- 
familiar in context or totally 
meaningless ; 

You, Charles Dalgleish For- 
rester, uncommitted, undeclared, 
elapsed thirty-seven years, un- 
employed-pending, take greeting 
and are directed. Requirement; 

To be present at Congruency 
Hearing, hours 1075, days 15, 
months 9  

It had the authentic feel of 
legalese, he saw with dismay. 
Much of the face of the single 
sheet of paper the blue material 
enclosed was covered with a sort 
of angular, almost readable let- 
tering  something like the ma- 
chine script they used to put on 
checks, Forrester thought, and 
realized that that was no doubt 
what it was. 

But it had a date on it, and as 
that date appeared to be a week 
or more away, as near as For- 
rester could figure, he tabled it 
with some relief and turned to 
the next and last item in the 
folder. 

This was a financial statement. 
Attached to it was a crisp metal- 

28 



lie slip with the same angular 
printing on it, but which Forres- 
ter recognized as a check. 

He fingered it lovingly and 
puzzled out the amount. 

It was made out to him, and 
it was for $231,057.56. 

Forrester attempted to fold it 
 it sprang back like spring 
steel  and put it away flat in 
his pocket. It felt good there. 

He was faintly puzzled by the 
fact that it was some twenty 
thousand dollars less than he had 
expected. But in terms of per- 
centage the amount didnt seem 
very significant, and he was 
cheerfully reconciled to the opin- 
ion that this society, like all so- 
cieties, would do doubt have 
some sort of taxes. Twenty grand 
was, after all, an amount he 
could well afford as a sort of 
initiation fee. 

Feeling much more secure, he 
emerged into the sunlight and 
looked about him. 

It was late afternoon. The sun 
was to his right. Slate-blue water 
stretched to his left. He was 
looking southward over the great 
pinnacled mass of the city. 

Aircraft moved above it. 
Things crawled ih its valleys. The 
sun picked out reflections from 
glass and metal and, although it 
was still daylight, the city was 
already exuding a building glow 
of neon and fluorescence. 

There were at least ten mil- 



GALAXY 



lion persons in Shoggo, Forrester 
knew. There were theaters and 
card parties and homes, places 
where he might find a friend or 
a lover. Or even an enemy. Down 
there was the girl who had kissed 

him last night  Tip and the 

Martian and his gang, who had 
tried to kill him. 

But where? 

Forrester did not now virhere 
to begin. 

Alive, healthy, with almost a 
quarter of a million dollars in his 
pocket, he felt out of things. 
Standing on a planet with a pop- 
ulation of seventeen billion ac- 
tive human beings, and at least 
twice that number dreaming in 
the slow cold of the helium 
baths, he felt entirely alone. 

F rom his belt the voice of the 
joymaker spoke up: 

Man Forrester. Will you take 
your messages? 

Yes, said Forrester, discon- 
certed. No. Wait a minute. 

He took the last cigarette out 
of the pack he had got that morn- 
ing, lit it, crumpled the pack 
and threw it away. He thought. 

Owning a joymaker was a little 
like having a genie with three 
wishes. The things promptness 
and precision disconcerted him; 
he felt that it demanded equal 
certitude from himself and did 
not feel up to it. 

He grinned to himself ruefully, 



admitting that he was being mack 
self-conscious by what he knew 
really to be nothing but a radio 
connection with some distant 
lash-up of cold-state transistors 
and ferrite cores. He said finally; 

Look. You. I think what I 
ought to do is go back to my 
room and start over again from 
home base. Whats the best way 
to get there? 

Man Forrester, said the joy- 
maker, the best way to get to 
the room you occupied is by cab, 
which I can summon for you. 
However, the room is no longer 
yours. Will you accept your mes- 
sages? 

No. Wait a minute! What do 
you mean, no longer mine? I 
didnt check out. 

But he paused and thought, 
and on consideration that didnt 
seem to matter much. He had 
left nothing there. No bag, no 
baggage. No personal possessions, 
not even a shaving brush  he 
wouldnt have to shave for a week 
or two anyway, Hara had told 
him. 

All that he had put of himself 
into that room was the garments 
he had worn last night. And 
those, he remembered, were dis- 
posable . and had therefore no 
doubt been disposed of. 

What about the bill? he ask- 
ed. 

The charge was paid by the 
West Annex Discharge Center. 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



29 



it is entered on your financial 
statement, Man Forrester. Your 
messages include one urgent, two 
personal, one notice of legal, 
seven commercial   

I dont want to hear right 
now. Wait a minute. 

Once again Forrester tried to 
frame the right question. 

He abandoned the effort. 
Whatever his skills, he was not 
a computer programmer and it 
was no good trying to talk like 
one. It seemed absurd to ask a 
machine for value judgments, 
but  

Gripes, he said, tell me 
something. What would you do, 
right now, if you were me? 
The joymaker answered with- 
out hesitation, as though that 
sort of question were coming up 
every day. If I were you, Man 
Forrester, which is to say if I 
were human, just unfrozen, with- 
out accommodations, lacking ma- 
jor social contacts, unemployed, 
unskilled   

Thats the picture, all right, 
Forrester agreed. So answer the 
question. Something was crawl- 
ing underfoot. He stepped aside, 
out of its way, a glittering metal 
thing. 

I would go to a tea shop, Man 
Forrester. I would then read my 
orientation book while enjoying 
a light meal. I would then think 
things over. I would then   
Thats far enough. 



The metal thing, apparently 
espying Forresters discarded 
cigarette pack, scuttled over to 
it and gobbled it down. Forres- 
ter watched it for a second, then 
nodded. 

Youve got some idea, ma- 
chine, he said. Take me to a 
tea shop! 

IV 

'T^he joymaker procured a cab 
for Forrester  a wingless 
vehicle like the death-reversal 
equipment that had brought him 
in for repair, but orange and 
black instead of white; it looked 
like Halloween. And the cab took 
him to the joy makers recommen- 
dation for a tea shop. 

The shop was curious. It was 
located in an interior hall of a 
great, spidery building in the 
heart of the city. The cab flew 
in under a pierced-steel buttress, 
actually into a sort of vaulted 
opening at least fifty feet above 
ground. 

It halted and hovered be- 
fore a baleony planted with 
elimbing roses, and Forrester had 
to step over a knife-edge of emp- 
ty space. The cab did not quiver, 
not even when his weight left 
it. 

A girl with hair like transparent 
cellophane greeted him. I have 
your reservation, Man Forres- 
ter. Will you follow me, please? 



30 



GALAXY 



He did, walking behind her 
across a quartz-pebbled court 
and into the hall that w/as the 
tea room, admiring the swing of 
her hips and wondering just what 
it was that she did to her hair 
to make it stand out like a sculp- 
tured puffball and rob it of opaci- 
ty- 

She seated him beside a reflect- 
ing pool, with silvery fish swim- 
ming slowly about. Even with 
the peculiar hairdo, she was a 
pretty girl. She had dimples and 
dark, amused eyes. 

He said, i dont know what 
I want, actually. Anyway, who 
do I order from? 

We are all the same, Man 
Forrester, she said. May I 
choose for you? Some tea and 
cakes? 

Numbly he nodded turned and 
as she turned and left watched 
the sway of her hips with an- 
tirely different kind of interest. 

He sighed. This was a confus- 
ing world! 

TTe took the book out of the 
^ folder he had been given 
at the West Annex Discharge 
Center and placed it on the 
table. Its cover was simple and 
direct: 

Your Guide to the 26th Century 
(1907-1990 Edition) 

 Where to Go 
 How to Live 



 Managing Your Money 
  Laws, Customs, Folkways 

It was edge-indexed with help- 
ful headings: Making Friends; 
Living on a Budget; How to Get 
the Most Out of Your Toymaker; 
Job Opportunities; Where to Get 
Needed Training . it went on 
and on. Forrester, flipping 
through the pages, was aston- 
ished to find how many of them 
there were. 

He had a good weeks rea.iing 
here, he estimated. Obviously 
the first thing to do was for liim 
to decide what was the first thing 
to do. 

Making friends could wait a 
bit. He seemed already to have 
made more friends  and ene- 
mies!  than he could assimilate. 

Living on a budget? He smiled 
to himself and patted the pocket 
that held his check. 

How to get the most out of your 
joymaker, though. That was a 
good place to start, thought For- 
rester, opened the book to the 
right page and began to read. 

The remote-access computer 
transponder called the joymak- 
er is your most valuable single 
possession in your new life. If 
you can imagine a combination 
of telephone, credit card, alarm 
clock, pocket bar, reference li- 
brary .and full-time secretary, 
you will have sketched some of 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



31 



the functions provided by your 
joymaker. 

Essentially it is a transponder 
connecting you with the central 
computing facilities of the city 
in which you reside on a shared- 
time self-programming basis. 
Shared-time means that many 
other joymakers use the same 
central computer  in Shoggo, 
something like ten million of 
them. If you go to another city 
your joymaker will continue to 
serve you, but it must be reset 
to a new frequency and pulse- 
code. This will be done auto- 
matically when you travel by 
public transportation. However, 
if you use private means, or if 
for any reason you spend any 
time in the agricultural areas, 
you must notify the joymaker of 
your intentions. It will Inform 
you of any steps you must take. 

Self-programming means 
that the programmed software 
includes  

The self-programming, shared- 
time girl with the dark, grave 
eyes brought Forrester his tea 
and cakes. Thank you, he said, 
staring at her. He was still not 
quite sure of his deductions about 
her. He tried an experiment. 
Can you give me my messages? 
he asked. 

Certainly, Man Forrester, if 
you wish, she said promptly. 
Alfred Guysman wishes to see 
you on political business. Rever- 
end Sam Tshumu wishes to see 



you on religious busiriess, but is 
at present not available and will 
contact you later. Adne Bensen 
asks you to return her mes.sage 
of this morning. The Nineteenth 
Chromatic Trust informs you 
that arrangements have been 
made for you to establish bank- 
ing facilities with them   
Thats enough, he said, tnur- 
velling at how nicely a shared- 
time transponder could be pack- 
aged. Ill take the rest later. 
There was no sugar for the 
tea, but it was physically hot and 
chemically cool at the same time 
 rather like a mentholated cig- 
arette, except that there was no 
particular taste associated with 
it. Forrester returned to his book. 

Self-programming means 
that the programmed software 
includes procedures for trans- 
lating most normal variations of 
voice, idiom, accent and other , 
variable modalities into a com- 
puter-oriented simscripl and 
thence to the mathematical ex- 
pressions on which the comput- 
ers operate. As long as your 
personal joymaker is within re- 
ception range of your voice you 
may communicate via other 
shared-time transponders if you 
wish. Appropriate modulation 
will be established automatically. 
However, do not attempt to use 
another individuals joymaker 
when yours is not within range. 
Proper coding cannot be tissur- 



32 



GALAXY 



ed. In the event that your joy- 
maker is lost or damaged  

Forrester sighed and ate one 
of the cakes. It was rich with 
flavors like butter and cinna- 
mon and others he could not 
identify. Pleasant but strange. 

Very much like this world that 
had been given him. 

ttAyTan Forrester, said the 
joymaker at his belt, its 
tones muffled by his coat and 
the tablecloth, it is necessary 
for you to accept some messages. 
I have a notice of personal visit 
and   

Forrester said, Look, Im do- 
ing what you said, right? Im 
reading my book. Let me figure 
it out a little before you throw 
messages at me. Unless, he said 
as an afterthought, theres 
something thats life-and-death. 
There are no messages involv- 
ing life or death, Man Forrester. 
Then wait a while. He was 
aware  he didnt know how 
long it had been going on  
that a distant wind instrument 
was hooting faintly. Pleasant but 
strange. Spiced cool breezes blew 
from the paneled wall^, also 
pleasant but strange. 

He said hesitantly, Joymaker, 
answer me a question. Why did 
whats-his-name, Heinzie, beat 
me up? 

I cannot identify the indiv- 



idual, Man Forrester. You were 
beaten up by four persons in 
the one recorded incident of at- 
tack. Their names were Shloino 
Cassavetes, Heinzlichen Jura de 
Syrtis Major, Edwardino   
That one. Heinzlichen Jura 
de Syrtis Major. Or, for that 
matter, all of them  why did 
they rumble me? 

I have a priority message re- 
garding Heinzlichen Jura de Syr- 
tis iviajOi', Man Forrester. Per- 
haps it will be informative. May 
1 give it to you? 

Oh, hell. Why not? 
Heinzlichen Jura de Syrtis 
Major is protesting enforcement 
of guaranties and has enjoyed 
disbursements under his bond. 
You are notified, Man Forrest- 
er. 

Forrester said hotly, Thats 
what you call informative? Look, 
skip the damned messages and 
answer the question. What was 
that scene all about? 

You have asked three ques- 
tions, Man Forrester. May I offer 
a synoptic reply? 

Please do, old friend. 
Heinzlichen Jura de Syrtis 
Major, a guest in the rep-rooms 
utilized by Alin Hara, conceived 
a grievance against you, cause 
unstated. Calling into association 
Shlomo Cassavetes, Edwardino 
Wry and Edwardeto Wry, they; 
formed an ad hoc club and filed 
appropriate conformance in re- 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



33 



gard to bonds and guaranties. 
The intention was stated as mur- 
der, first phase, ad lib. The mo- 
tivation was stated as grievance 
as to de Syrtis Major, practical 
joke as to the others. Conform- 
ances were recorded and the sub- 
ject, that is, yourself, Man For- 
rester, was notified. Does that 
answer your three questions, Man 
Forrester? 

What do you think? Forres- 
ter snapped. Well, maybe it 
does. Sort of. You mean those 
other three finks lumped me for 
a joke? 

They so stated, yes, Man For- 
rester. 

And theyre still running 
around loose? 

Do you wish me to ascertain 
their present whereabouts, Man 
Forrester? 

No, I mean, arent they in jail 
or something? 

No, Man Forrester. 

Forrester said, Joymaker, 
leave me alone for a while. I bet- 
ter get back to my orientation 
book. I see I dont know as much 
as I thought I did. 

Forrester drank the rest of his 
tea, ate the rest of his cakes and 
plowed back into his book. 

To use your joymaker as 
telephone: You must know the 
ortho-name and identification 
spectrum of the person you wish 
to reach. Once you have given 



this information to the joymak- 
er it will be remembered and 
you can then refer to the per- 
son in later calls by a reciprocal 
name or any other personal iden- 
tification programmed into your 
joymaker. If you have been 
called by any person, the joy- 
maker will have recorded the 
necessary ortho-name and iden- 
tification spectrum. Simply ask 
the joymaker to call the person 
you wish to speak to. If you 
wish to establish a priority rat- 
ing with any person, that person 
must so inform his joymaker. 
Otherwise your calls may be de- 
ferred or canceled as directed 
by the called person. 

To use your joymaker as cred- 
it card: You must know the 
institutional designation and ac- 
count spectrum  

A belated thought percolated 
to the surface of Forres- 
ters mind. Messages. Financial 
institutions. One of the messages 
had been from something that 
sounded like that. 

He sighed and looked around 
the room. Most of the tables were 
empty. But it was a targe room, 
and there were perhaps fifty oth- 
er persons in it, all of them seat- 
ed at tables in twos and threes 
and larger groups. Through some 
effect of the sound-conditioning 
he could not hear their voices, 
only the distant hooting flute nnd 
a faint splashing from tl^c (p.int 
fish in the reflecting pools. 



34 



GALAXY 



He wondered if any of these 
fifty people would mind if he got 
up and walked over to them. 

Touching the faintly sore spots 
on his shoulders and neck, he de- 
cided against it. 

But it gave him an idea, and he 
turned to the section of the book 
on Making Friends. 

I have an urgent notice of per- 
sonal visit, Man Forrester, 
grumbled the joymaker from his 
waist. 

Just save it, said Forrester, 
preoccupied. He was startled at 
the length of the list of ways of 
making friends. Above all, there 
were clubs. Clubs in such pro- 
fusion that he wondered even 
seventeen billion people could 
fill their rolls. Social clubs, gym- 
nastic clubs, professional clubs. 
Political groups, religious groups, 
therapeutic groups. There was a 
Society of First Families of Mars, 
and a Loyal Order of Descen- 
dants of Barsoom Fans. There 
were forty-eight bird-watching 
groups in Shoggo alone. There 
were stamp-collectors and coin- 
collectors and tax-token collec- 
tors and jet-car transfer collec- 
tors. 

There was something called 
the Society of Ancients which 
looked interesting, as it appeared 
to be an organization of persons 
like Forrester himself, revived 
from the dead heart of the freez- 
ers. Yet it was listed with such 



curiosities as the B.P.O.E. and 
the Industrial Workers of the 
World (Memorial Association) in 
small type at the end of the sec- 
tion. 

Puzzling. If it existed at all, 
should it not have a member- 
ship in the billions? 

Evidently, it did not, but . 

Man Forrester, shrilled the 
joymaker, I must inform you of 
personal visitation by   

Wait a minute, said Forres- 
ter, suddenly looking up, startl- 
ed. 

There was a hint of perfume 
in the air. 

Forrester put down his book, 
frowning. 

The scent was familiar. What 
was it? Another tactile-tape mes- 
sage from this Adne Bensen, who- 
ever she might be? 

He felt a touch on his shoulder, 
then warm arms around him, a 
hug. 

These tactile tapes were cer- 
tainly convincing, he thought 
momentarily, then realized this 
was not a tape. He was not mere- 
ly feeling and smelling the pres- 
ence of the embracing arms. He 
saw them, from the corner of his 
eye, and awkwardly, like a wrest- 
ler struggling to break a hold, 
he turned inside them. 

He saw the face of the girl 
from the party, very near to his. 

Tip! he cried. My God but 
Im glad to see you! 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



35 



TT^hen you came right down to 
it, Forrester hardly knew 
the girl, barring a little friendly 
kissing at a party, but at this 
moment she was very dear to 
him. It was like a chance meet- 
ing in Taiwan with somebody 
who sat at the far end of the 
commuter train for years. Not a 
friend. Hardly even an acquain- 
tance; but promoted by the acci- 
dent of unexpected meeting to 
the status of near and dear. He 
hugged her tight. She laughed 
breathlessly and shook free. 
Dear Charles, she gasped, 
not so hard. 

Im sorry. He seated her and 
sank down opposite, admiring her 
dark hair and pale skin, her 
cheerful, pretty face and her fig- 
ure. The others in the tea room, 
some of whom had turned to 
look at them, were losing inter- 
est and returning to their own 
affairs. Forrester said, Its just 
that Im so glad to see you. Tip, 

She looked startled, then faint- 
ly reproving. My name is Adne 
Bensen, dear Charles. Call me 
Adne. 

But last night Hara called 
you  oh! he said, remember- 
ing. Then youre the girl who 
has been sending me the mes- 
sages. 

She nodded! 

Very nice messages they 
were, he said. Would you like 
some tea? 



She said, Oh, I think not. I 
mean, not here, anyway. I came 
to see if youd like to come to 
my place for dinner. 

"Yes! 

She laughed, You are such 
an impetuous man, Charles. Is 
that why they call you the kami- 
kaze people? I mean, your cen- 
tury and all. 

As to that, Adne, I dont 
know, he said, because, when 
you come right down to it, I 
dont know who calls me what. 
I am, you might say, confused. 
One of the many reasons why 
I am pleased to see you is that 
I need somebody to talk to. 

She settled in a chair opposite 
him and took some tea, after all. 
It came without being asked for; 
apparently the joymaker had 
monitored their conversation and 
drawn the inferences any good 
waiter would draw. She threw 
back her filmy, puffy wrap  
it had floated around her shoul- 
ders like a cloud, but it lay back 
against the chair quite incon- 
spicuously, Forrester noticed  
and revealed a deep-cut, tight- 
fitting, flesh-colored vest or jer- 
kin of some sort that was start- 
ling at first. 

At second look it was still 
startling. 

She said, Dear Charles. Dont 
you ask your joymaker tilings! 

I would except I dont know 
what to ask. 



36 



GALAXY 



*Oh, anything! What do you 
want? Have you filed a profile? 
I dont think so. 

Oh, do! Then it will tell you 
what programs are on, what par- 
ties you will be welcomed at, 
who you would wish to know. 
Its terrible to go on impulse, 
Charles, she said earnestly. Let 
the joymaker help you. 

He discovered that his own tea 
cup had been replenished, and 
sipped it. I dont understand, 
he said. You mean I should let 
the joymaker decide what Im 
going to do for fun? 

Of course. Theres so much. 
How could you know what you 
would like? 

He shook his head. 

But that was all of that con- 
versation, all for then. His joy- 
maker said suddenly, its voice 
curiously tinny, PRIORITY 
URGENT! THIS IS A DRILL! 
TAKE COVER! TAKE COVER! 
TAKE COVER!! 

Oh, dear, said Adne, pouting. 
Well lets go. 

TAKE COVER! blared the 
joymaker again, and Forrester 
discovered the reason for its 
metallic sound. Not only his but 
the girls, those of patrons at 
other tables, all the joymakers at 
once were repeating the same 
message. TAKE COVER! 
COUNTDOWN STARTS NOW! 
ONE HUNDRED SECONDS. 
NINETY-NINE . . 



Where are you going? For- 
rester asked, rising with her. 

To the shelter, of course! 
Hurry it up, Charles, will you? 
I hate it when Im out in a public 
place in one of these things. 
-NINETY-ONE. NINETY. 
EIGHTY-NINE 

He said, swallowing hard; Air 
raid? A war? 

She had his hand, tugging him 
along toward an exit at the rear 
of the tea room, where the other 
patrons were already beginning 
to stream out. Not exactly, 
Charles dear. Dont you know 
anything? 

Then what? 

Aliens. Monsters. Thats all. 
Now hurry, or well never get a 
seat. 

V 

A walk, an elevator ride, a short 
stretch through a light-walled 
corridor, and they came out into 
a great shadowy auditorium. 
There was just enough light to 
find their way to seats. It was 
filling rapidly, and behind them 
Forrester heard heavy doors 
slamming. 

When about three-quarters of 
the seats were filled a man in 
black climbed onto the stage and 
said, Thank you all for your co- 
operation. Im pleased to be able 
to tell you that this building has 
achieved four-nines compliance 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



37 



in exactly one hundred and forty- 
one seconds. 

There was a stir of interest 
from the audience. Forrester, 
craning his neck to find the source 
of the P.A. system  it seemed 
to murmur from all over the hall 
 located it at last as the man 
spoke again. It was his joymaker, 
and all the joymakers, repeating 
what the man said. 

This is one of the best show- 
ings weve ever had, he said 
warmly, and I appreciate it. 
You may leave. 

You mean thats all there is 
to it? Forrester asked the girl. 

Thats all. Are you coming 
up to my place? 

He persisted, But  if theres 
going to be a raid, or any chance 
of one, shouldnt we wait and 
see   

See what, Charles dear? 
Theres no need to grovel in the 
ground like moles. Its just a 
test. 

Yes, but   He hesitated, 
and followed her out of the 
auditorium thoughtfully. 

It was confusing. No one had 
mentioned wat to him. 

But when he said as much to 
Adne, she laughed. VFar? Oh, 
Charles! Youre so funny, you 
kamikazes! Now weve wasted 
enough time  are you coming 
to my place for dinner or not? 

He sighed. 

Oh, sure, he said. 



I n the life that had begun with 
his birth in 1932 and ended 
with the inhalation of a lungful 
of flame thirty-seven years later, 
Forrester had been a successful, 
self-sufficient and substantial 
man. 

He had a wife  her name 
was Dorothy, small, blonde, a 
little younger than himself. He 
had three sons, and a job as copy 
chief of a technical writing ser- 
vice, and a reputation among his 
friends as a fine poker player 
and useful companion. 

Although he had missed par- 
ticipation in a war, he was a Boy 
Scout in World War II, partici- 
pating in scrap-metal drives and 
Slap the Jap waste fat collections. 
As a young adult he had lived 
through the H-bomb hysteria of 
the early fifties, when every city 
street blossomed out with signs 
directing the nearest way to a 
bomb shelter. He had seen enough 
movies and television shows to 
know what air raid drills meant. 

He was not very satisfied with 
the one he had seen. He tried to 
phrase his dissatisfaction to Adne 
as she changed clothes behind a 
screen, but she was not very in- 
terested. Drills were an annoy- 
ance to her, it was clear. 

She came out from behind 
the screen, wearing something 
filmy and pale, and not at all 
practical for cooking dinner. On 
tlie other hand, Forrester thought. 



38 



GALAX'V 



who knew how these people 
cooked their dinners? She rustled 
over to him, lifted his hand, 
kissed his fingers and sat down 
beside him, pulling her joy- 
maker from the place by the arm 
of the chair where she had left 
it: Excuse me, Charles dear, 
she said, and, to the joymaker; 
Receiving messages. 

Forrester could not hear what 
the joymaker said to her because 
she was holding it close to her 
ear and had evidently somehow 
turn^'d the volume down  ^which 
he resolved to learn how to do. 
But he heard what she said to it, 
though it was largely incompre- 
hensible: Cancel. Hold Three. 
Comissary four, two as pro- 
grammed, two A-varied. And, 
That takes care of that, she 
said to him. Would you like a 
drink? 

All right. She lifted glasses 
out of the well of the  Forrester 
would have called it a cocktail 
table, and perhaps it was. He 
noticed her eyes were on a stack 
of parcels on a low table across 
the room. Excuse me, she said, 
pouring a minty liquid for him 
and one for herself. I just have 
to look at these things. She took 
a small sip of her drink and 
crossed to the packages. 

Forrester decided he liked his 
drink, which was not sweet and 
made his nose tingle. Been shop- 
ping? he asked. Adne was taking 



out clothes, small packets which 
might have been cosmetics, some 
things like appliances. 

Oh, no, Charles dear. Its my 
job. She was preoccupied with 
a soft, billowy green thing, strok- 
ing it against her cheek thought- 
fully. With a twist of her arms 
she threw it around her shoulders 
and it became a sort of Eliza- 
bethan ruff. Like it, dear? 
Sure. I mean, I guess I do. 
Its soft. Feel. She drew it 
over his face. It felt like fur, 
though its points thrust out again 
immediately they left his skin, 
looking starched and throny. Or 
this, she said, taking it off and 
replacing it with what looked 
liked oiled silk in the box it came 
in, but on her shoulders dis- 
appeared entirely, except that it 
gave luster and color to her skin. 
Or 

Theyre all beautiful, he said. 
What do you mean, its your 
job? 

t tTm a reacter, she said proud- 
A ly. Weighted nearly 50 mil- 
lion, with two-nines reliability. 
Which means? 

Oh, you know. If I like things, 
chances are ninety-nine out of a 
hundred that the others will too. 
Fifty million of them? 

She nodded, flushed and 
pleased. 

And this is how you make a 
living? 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



39 



"Its how I get rich, she cor- 
rected him. Say! She looked at 
him thoughtfully, I wonder . 
Do you have any idea how many 
others like you have come out 
of the dormers? Maybe you could 
get a job doing the same thing 
I could ask. 

He patted her hand, indulgent 
and amused. No. thanks, he 
said, carefully not to mention the 
fact that he was rich  although, 
he remembered dimly, he had 
been far less reticent about it 
at the party the night before. 
Well, he had made a lot of mis- 
takes at the party  as witness 
his troubles with the Martian. 

I never asked, said Adne, 
putting the things away. How 
did you die, Charles? 

Why, he said, sitting down 
again and waiting for her to join 
him, I died in a fire. As a matter 
of fact, I understand I was a 
hero. 

Really! She was impressed. 

I was a volunteer fireman, 
you know, and there was an 
apartment fire one night  it was 
January, witchy cold, if you stood 
still in the spill water youd 
freeze to the ground in two 
minutes  and there was a child 
in the upper part of the building. 
And I was the nearest one to the 
ladder. 

He sipped his drink, admiring 
its milky, golden color. I forgot 
my Air-Pak, he admitted. The 



smoke got me. Or the combi- 
nation did  smoke and heat. And 
maybe booze, because Id just 
come from a party. Hara said 1 
must have inhaled pure flame 
because my lungs were burnt. 
My face must have been, too, of 
course. ! mean, you wouldnt 
know, but I dont think I look 
quite the same as I used to. A 
little leaner now, and maybe a 
little younger. And I dont think 
my eyes were quite as bright 
blue. 

She giggled. Hara cant help 
editing. Most people dont mind 
a tvw improvements. 

Dinner had arrived as his 
breakfast had that morning, 
through a servadoor in the wall. 
Adne excused herself for a mo- 
ment while the table was setting 
up. 

She was gone more than a 
moment and came back looking 
amused. Thats that, she said 
without explaining. Lets eat. 

/^f the foods served him For- 
rester was able to identify 
little or nothing. The textures 
were .sort of Oriental, with crisp 
things like water chestnuts and 
gummy things like sukiyaki vary- 
ing the crunch of lettuce and the 
plasticity of starches. The flavors 
were queer but palatable. 

You must have been one of 
the first to be frozen, she com- 
mented. 1969? Thats only a few 



40 



GALAXY 




years after the freezing began. 
First on the book, he agreed. 
It was because of the fire com- 
pany, I guess. I know they had 
the new death - reversal truck 
standing by for several months, 
waiting for a victim. I didnt think 
Id be the one to christen it. 

He ate a forkful of something 
like creamed onions in a pastry 
crust and said, It must have 
been confusing for Dorothy. 
Your wife? 

He nodded. I wonder if theres 
any way I can find out about her. 
What she did. How the children 
made out. She was young when 
I was killed  lets see. Thirty- 
three, about. I dont know if 
having a husband dead but frozen 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



would let her marry again . 
hope she did ... I mean   He 
broke off, wondering what he did 
mean. 

Anyway, he said Kara had 
some records. She lived nearly 
fifty more years, died in her 
eighties of the third massive 
stroke. Shed been partly para- 
lyzed for some time. He shook 
his head, trying to visualize small, 
blonde Dorothy as a bedridden, 
beldame. 

Had enough? asked Adne. 

He came back to present time, 
faintly startled. Dinner? Why, 
I guess so. It was delicous. She 
did something that caused the 
table to retract itself and stood 
up. Come over here and have 

41 



your coffee. I ordered it specially 
for you. Would you like some 
music? 

He started to say, Not par- 
ticularly, but she had already 
started some with visions of Bar- 
tok and music-concrete. But it 
turned out to be something very 
like violins, playing something 
very like detached, introspective 
T schaikowsky . 

She sank back against him, and 
she was very warm and fragrant. 
Well have to find you a place 
to live, she said. 

He put his arm around her. 
This is a condominum build- 
ing, she said thoughtfully, but 
I think there might be something. 
Do you have any preferences? 
I dont know enough to have 
preferences, he said, caressing 
her soft hair. In a place to live, 
anyway. 

She said drowsily, Thats 
nice. And in the same tone, a 
moment later, But I think I 
should warn you Im natural- 
flow And this is about M-day 
minus four, so all I want is to be 
cuddled. She yawned and 
touched her mouth with her 
hand. Oh! Excuse me. 

Then she caught a glimpse of 
his face. You dont mind, do 
you? she asked sitting up. I 
mean, i could take a pill  
Charles, why are you that color? 
Nothing, Nothing at all! 

She said apologetically, Im 
42 



sorry, but I dont know much 
about kamikaze ways. If theres 
a ritual tabu. Im sorry. 

No tabu. Just a mi,sunder- 
standing. He picked up his glass 
and held it to her. Any more of 
this stuff around? 

Charles dear, she said, 
stretching, theres all you want. 
And 1 have an idea. 

Shoot. 

Im going to find you a place 
to live! she cried. You ju.st 
stay here. Order what you want. 
She touched something that he 
could not see and added, If you 
dont know how, the children will 
show you while theyre keejjing 
you company. 

What had seemed like a floor- 
length mural opened itself into 
a door. Forrester found himself 
looking into a bright gay room 
where two small children were 
racing each other around a sort 
of climbable maze. 

We ate our dinner, Mim, 
cried one of them, then saw For- 
rester and nudged the other. The 
two looked at him with calm 
appraisal. 

You dont mind this either, 
do you, Charles dear? Adne 
asked. Thats another thing 
about being natural-flow. 

T here were two of them, a boy 
and a girl, about seven and 
five. Forrester guessed. They ac- 
cepted him without question. 

GALAXY 



Or not exactly that, thou^t 
Forreater ruefully. There were 
questions. 

Charles! Did people really 
smell bad in the old days? 

Oh, Charles! You rode in 
automobiles? 

When the little children had 
to work in the coal mines, 
Charles, didnt they get anything 
to eat?" 

But what did they play with, 
Charles? Dolls that didnt talk? 

He tried his best to answer. 
Well, the child-labor time was 
over when I lived, or almost. And 
dolls did talk, sort of. Not very 
intelligently .  

When did you live, Charles? 

I was burned to death in 
1969  

The little girl shrieked, For 
witchcraft? 

Oh, no. No, that was hundreds 
of years earlier too. Charles 
tried not to laugh. You see, 
houses used to catch on fire those 
days   

The Shoggo fire! shouted the 
boy. Mrs. Learys cow and the 
earthquake! 

Well  something like that. 
Anyway, there were men whose 
job it was to put the fires out, 
and I was one of them. Only then 
I got caught and died there. 

Mim drowned once, the little 
girl bragged. We havent died 
at all. 

You were sick once, though, 
THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



said the boy seriously. You 
could have died. I heard Mim 
talking to the medoc. 

Forrester said, Are you chil- 
dren in school? 

They looked at him, then at 
each other. 

I mean, are you old enough 
to start lessons? 

The boy said, Well, sure, 
Charles. Tunt ought to be doing 
hers right now, as a matter of 
fact. 

So should you! Mim said   
We have to be polite to guests. 
Tunt! The boy said to Charles, 
Is there anything we can get 
you? Something to eat? Drink? 
Watch a program? Sex - stini? 
Although I guess you ought to 
know, he said apologetically, 
that Mims natural-flow and   
Yes, yes, I know about that, 
Forrester said hastily, and 
thought. Sweet God! 

But being in Rome, he thought, 
it was what the Romans did that 
counted, and he would do his 
best. He resolved it earnestly. 

It was like being at a party. 
You got there at ten oclock, 
with your collar too tight and a 
little grouchy at being rushed and 
your starched shirt-front wet 
where the kids splashed it when 
you supervised their bedtime 
tooth-brushing. And your host 
was old Sam whod been such a 
drag, and his wife Myra was in 
one of her nouveau-riche moods. 



43 



showing off the new dishmaker, 
and the conversation started out 
about politics, which was Sams 
most offensive side. 

But then you had the second 
drink: And then the third. Faces 
grew brighter. You began to feel 
more at ease. The whole bunch 
laughed at one of your jokes. The 
music on the stack of records 
changed to something you could 
dance to. You began to catch 
the rhythm of the party . 

Oh, Ill try vowed Forrester, 
joining the children in a sort of 
board game played against their 
own joymakers. Ill catch the 
mood of this age if it kills me. 
Again. 

VI 

Y Tp betimes, and set out to con- 
quer a world. 

The home that Adne found for 
him was fascinating  walls that 
made closets as he needed them, 
windov/s that were not windows 
but something like television 
screens  Forrester resolutely 
spent no time exploring its mar- 
vels. After a disturbed nights 
sleep he was up and out, testing 
his new world and learning to 
cope with it. The children were 
marvelous. He begged the loan 
of them from Adne and they 
were his guides. They took him 
to the offices of the Nineteenth 
Chromatic Trust where a portly 



old Ebent'zes Scsouge gravely ex- 
amined Forresters check, pains- 
takingly showed him how to draw 
against it, severely supervised his 
signing the necessary documents 
to open an account, and only at 
the end revealed himself by say- 
in, Man Forrester, good day. 
They took him to a Titanian 
restaurant for lunch, a lark for 
them, a shattering test of nerve 
to him, for the Titanians ate 
only live food and he was barely 
able to cope with an aspic that 
writhed and rustled on his spoon. 
They showed him their play- 
school, where for three hours a 
week they competed and jdotted 
with their peers (their lessons 
were learned at home, via their 
child-modified joymakers), and 
Forrester found himself playing 
London Bridge is Falling Down 
with fourteen children and one 
other adult, symbolically acting 
out the ritual murder and en- 
tombment in the bridges foun- 
dations that the nursery rhyme 
celebrated. They took him to 
where the poor people lived, 
with half-fearful giggles and in- 
junctions against speaking to any- 
one, and Forrester found himself 
out of pocket change, having 
given it all away to pale, mum- 
bling creatures with hard-luck 
stories about Sol-burn on Mer- 
cury and freezer insurance firms 
that had gone bankrupt. They 
took him to a park  indoors. 



44 



GALAXY 



underground  where the land- 
scaping was topologically grotes- 
que and a purling stream flowed 
through a hills base and up the 
other side, and ducks and frogs 
and a feathery sort of Venusian 
fish ate morsels of food the chil- 
dren tossed them. They took him 
to a museum where animated, 
enlarged cells underwent mitosis 
with a plop like a cow lifting 
her foot from a bog, and a recre- 
ated Tyrannosaurus Rex coughed 
and barked and thumped its feet 
dangerously, its orange eyes 
glaring straight at Forrester. 
They showed him all their trea- 
sures and pleasures. But they 
did not show him a factory, or 
an office building, or a store of 
any size. For it did not seem that 
any of these existed any more. 
They showed him all of Shoggo 
until their joymakers chided 
them, and Forresters own said 
severely: Man Forrester! The 
children must be returned for 
their naps. And you really must 
receive your messages. 

The children looked at him 
with woe. Ah, well, said For- 
rester, well do it again another 
day. How do we get home from 
here? 

A cab, said the girl doubt- 
fully, but the boy shouted: 

Walk! We can walk! I know 
where we are. Ten minutes will 
do it. Ask your joymakers, if you 
dont believe me. 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



I believe you, said Forres- 
ter. 

Then this way, Charles. 
Come on, Tunt. And the boy led 
off between two towering build- 
ings, on the margin of a grassy 
strip where huge hovercraft 
swished by at enormous speeds. 

The joymaker complained, 
Man Forrester, I have dicho- 
tomous instructions. Please re- 
solve them. 

Oh, God, said Forrester, 
tired and irritable, whats your 
trouble now? 

You have instructed me to 
hold messages, but I have several 
which are high-priority and ur- 
gent. Please reaffirm holding or- 
der, stipulating a time limit if 
possible, or receive them now. 

The boy giggled. You know 
why, Charles? he demanded. 
It tickles them. Its like if you 
have to go to the bathroom. 

The joymaker said, The an- 
alog is inexact, Man Forrester. 
However, please allow me to dis- 
charge my message load. 

Forrester sighed and prepared 
to contemplate reality again. 
But something distracted him. 

Besides the steady whush, 
whush of the passing hovercraft, 
besides the distant chant of a 
choir  they were passing some 
sort of church  there was an- 
other sound. Forrester looked up. 

A faint tweeting sound of 
communications equipment was 

45 



coming from a white aircraa't, 
glass-fronted, hanging overhead. 
It bore the shining ruby cadu- 
ceus, and a dark-skinned man in 
blue was regarding Forrester 
gravely. 

Forrester swallowed. 

Joymaker, he demanded, is 
that a death-reversal vehicle 
overhead? 

Yes, Man Forrester. 

Does that mean   He 
cleared his throat. Does that 
mean that crazy Martian is after 
me again? 

Man Forrester, said the joy- 
maker primly, among your ur- 
gent priority messages is a legal 
notice. The twenty-four hour 
hold period having expired and 
appropriate notices and action 
having been filed and taken, the 
man Heinzlichen Jura de   

Cut it out! Is he after me? 

Man Forrester, said the joy- 
maker, yes. As of seventeen min- 
utes ago, the hold period having 
expired then, he is. 

A t least the crazy Martian 
wasnt in sight, thought 
Forrester, scanning the few visi- 
ble pedestrians. But the presence 
of the death-reversal aircraft was 
a poor omen. 

Kids, he said, we got trou- 
bles. Im being chased. 

Oh, Charles! breathed the 
bojr, fascinated. Will you get 
killed? 



Not if I can help it. Looh. 
Do you know any short-cuts 
from here? Any secret ways  
through cellars, over rooftops, 
you know. 

The boy looked at the girl. 
The girls eyes got very big. 

Tunt, she whispered. Char- 
les wants to hide. 

Thats it, said Forre,ster. 
What about it, son? You must 
know some special way. Any kid 
would. 

The boy said, Charles. I know 
a way, all right. But are you 
sure   

Im sure. Im sure! snapped 
Charles Forrester. Come on! 
Where? 

The boy surrendered. Follow 
me. You too, Tunt. 

They turned and dived into 
one of the buildings. Forrester 
took a last look around for Heinz- 
lichen whatever-his-name-was. 
He was not in sight. Only the 
hovercraft thrumming past, and 
the few uncaring pedestrians . 
and overhead the man in blue in 
the death-reversal vehicle, star- 
ing down at him, his expression 
both surprised and angry. 

X/^hen he was safely in the con- 
dominium building, the chil- 
dren returned to their own home 
to await the arrival of their moth- 
er, Forrester hurried to his 
apartment, closed the door and 
locked it. 



46 



GALAXY 



Joymaker, he said, you 
were right. I admit it. So now 
lets have all those messages. 
And take it slow. 

The joymaker said serenely, 
Man Forrester, your messages 
follow. The Reverend Sam Tsh- 
umu asked you to call him, but 
he is no longer receiving mes- 
sages. Vincenzo d Angostura 

states that he is still available 
for legal representation but will 
not call again under Bar Associ- 
ation rules. Taiko Hironibi feels 
there was some misunderstand- 
ing and would like to discuss it 
with you. Adne Bensen sends 
you an embrace. A document 
package is in your receiving 
chute. Will you receive the em- 
brace? 

"Hold it a minute. Gives me 
something to look forward to. 
Whos this Reverend Sam Tsh- 
umu? 

Sam Tshumu: Male, Chris- 
tian entelechist, Utopian, five 
feet eight inches, proselytizer, 
business in regard to the assault 
on your person by Heinzlichen 
Jura de Syrtis Major. 

Well. All right. What about 
it? What does he have to say? 
I am sorry, Man Forrester. 
That ends the message. 

Can I call him back? 

No, Man Forrester. Reverend 
Sam Tshumu is at present in 
freeze due to injuries sustained 
at the same time. 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



That crazy Martian doesnt 
waste time, does he? Well, what 
about the other stuff? Any of it 
important? 

As to that, Man Forrester, f 
have no parameters. 

Youre a big help, said For- 
rester bitterly. Get me a drink 
while Im thinking. Uh, gin and 
tonic. He waited for it to ap- 
pear and took a long pull. 

His nerves began to feel like 
tangled barbed-wire. All right, 
he said. Now, what was that 
about a package? 

You have a document pack- 
age in our receiving chute, Man 
Forrester. Envelope. Approxi- 
mately nine centimeters by 25 
centimeters, less than one-half 
centimeter in thickness, weighing 
approximately eleven grams. In- 
scription; Mr. Charles Dalgleish 
Forrester, Social Security Num- 
ber 145-10-3088, last address 
while living 252 Dulcimer Drive, 
Evanston, Illinois. Died of burns 
received 16 October 1969. To be 
delivered upon revival. Contents 
unknown. 

Hum. Is that all it says? 

No, Man Forrester. There are 
machinescript handling instruc- 
tions on the document. I will 
phonemize them as close as pos- 
sible; Sigma triphase ooty-poot 
trip toe, baker tare sugar aleph, 
paraphase    

Yeah, well, thats enough of 
that. I mean, is there anything in 

47 



English? Anything T could under- 
stand? 

No, Man Forrester. Faint car- 
bonization marks are visible 
where the envelope has been 
creased. There are several minor 
discolorations which may repre- 
sent latent human skinprints. At 
some time a mild corrosive liquid 
was spilled   

Say, joymaker, said Forres- 
ter, Ive got an idea. Why dont 
I open it up? Whered you say it 
was? 

T3 etrieved from his receiving 
chute, the envelope turned 
out to be a letter from his wife. 

He stared at it and felt some- 
thing tingling in the corners of 
his eyes. The handwriting was 
very strange to him. The signa- 
ture was Still with atiection, 
Dorothy . .but the hand that 
had formed those letters scrawled 
and shook, and had even aban- 
doned her little finishing-school 
affectations of penmanship, the 
open-circle dots over the is, the 
flowing crosses on the fs. He 
could read it only with difficulty. 

Dear Charles, 

This is, I think, the tenth or 
eleventh time I have written 
this letter to you. I seem to do it 
every time there is a death or 
bad news, as though the only 
gossip I have that is worth the 
effort to pass on for what may 

48 



be another century  or more 
  is that which has to do with 
troubles. Not your troubles, of 
course. Not any more. Usually 
the troubles are mine. 

Although t must say that real- 
ly my life has not been a burden 
to me. I remember that you 
made me happy, Charles. I must 
tell you that I missed you ter- 
ribly. But I must also tell you 
that I got over it. 

To begin with: You will want 
to know what you died of, I 
know, and perhaps the people 
who bring you back to life will 
not be able to tell you. (I am 
assuming that you will be 
brought back to life. I didnt 
believe it at the time  but 
since then Ive seen it happen.) 

You were burned to death in 
a house fire on Christie Street 
on October 16th, 1969. Dr. Ten 
Eyck, who was with the first 
aid squad, pronounced you dead 
and. with some difficulty, per- 
suaded them to use their death- 
reversal equipment to freeze 
you. There was some trouble 
about lacking glycerol for per- 
fusion, but the whole fire com- 
pany, you will be glad to know, 
dug into their liquor closets and 
came up with several bottles of 
bourbon . and it was that 
which was used as a buffer. (If 
you woke up with a hangover, 
you now know why!) 

There was some question as 
to whether too much time had 
elapsed, too. They thought you 
might have spoiled during (he 
discussion, you see. But as it 

GALAXY 



was cold weather for October 
they decided to take a chance, 
and you were ultimately con- 
signed to a freeze-dormer at 
liquid helium temperatures. 
Where, as 1 write this, you now 
lie . , . and where, or in one 
like it, I expect to be myself 
before long. 

I should tell you that I didnt 
pay for any of this. Your fire 
company insurance, it turned 
out, was adequate to cover all 
I he costs and was in fact ear- 
marked for that purpose. If it 
harl been up to me 1 dont think 
I would have gone to the ex- 
pen.se, Charles, because after all 
there were the children to raise. 

What can 1 tell you about 
them? They missed you very 
much. 

Vance, in particular, played 
truant from school for the best 
part of a month, forging notes 
to his teacher, persuading some 
adult  I .suspected our clean- 
ing woman at the time  to 
phone the principal to explain 
his absence, before 1 found out 
about it. But then he joined a 
Boy .Scout troop and, as they 
say, developed other interests. 

David didnt say much. But I 
dont think he ever got over it. 
At least not during his lifetime. 
He joined the Peace Corps four 
years later and was executed 
by insurgents during the Huk 
uprising in 1974. Since his body 
was mutilated before being 
found he could not be frozen. 
So he, at least, we will never 
see again. 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



Vance is now married, and is 
in fact a grandfather. It was his 
second marriage; the first was 
annulled. His present wife was a 
schoolteacher before their mar- 
riage . and they have been 
happy. And I really can think 
of nothing else to tell you about 
your son Vance that does not 
involve attempting to explain 
what broke up his first marriage 
and why his second wife could 
not stay in the United Slates 
1 suppose you may meet him 
some dav You can ask h-im 
yourself. 

Billy, you will be astonished 
to learn, is now a Great Man. 

Let me see. He was two wlieii 
you died. Now hes our senator 
from Hawaii, and they say he 
will be president one day. But 
you will find out more about 
him in the history books than 
I can tell you, I think. Let me 
only say, what I know will in- 
terest you, that his first cam- 
paign was on a platform of free 
freezing for everyone, paid for 
out of Social Security funds, 
and you were mentioned in 
every speech. He won easily. 

And I , . am seventy-nine 

years old. 

Since you died forty years ago 
I cannot now remember you 
well enough, my Charles, to 
know if you will mind what 
I have to say next. Three years 
after your death I remarried. 
My husband  my other hus- 
band  was a doctor. Still is, 
though he is out of practice 
now. We have been very happy. 



49 



(oj. We had two other children. 
Both girls. You never met him, 
but he is a good man, barring 
the tact that at one time he 
drank too much. He gave it up. 
He looks a little like you . 

If I remember correctly, he 
does. 

And I am now in brittle 
health and this is the last time 
I will write you this letter. Per- 
haps we will meet again. I won- 
der what it will be like. 

Still with affection, 
Dorothy 

Forrester put down the letter 
and cried: Joymaker! Was 

there ever a president named 
Forrester? 

President of what, Man For- 
rester? 

President of the United 
States! 

Which United States is that, 
Man Forrester? 

Oh, for Gods sakes! The 
United States of America. Wait 
a minute. First off, do you know 
the presidents of the United 
States of America? 

Yes, Man Forrester. Washing- 
ton, George. Adams, John. Jef- 
ferson, Thomas   

Later on! starting with the 
middle of the 20th century: 
Yes, Man Forrester. Truman, 
Harry S. Eisenhower, Dwight D. 
Kennedy   

Move it up! Start with around 
1990 . 

50 



Yes, Man Forrester. Williams, 
Harrison E. Kaapp, Leonard. 
Stanchion, Karen P. Forrester, 
Wilton N. Tschirky, Leon   

Well, my God, said Forres- 
ter softly, and sat marveling 
while the joymaker droned on to 
the end of the twenty-first cen- 
tury, and stopped. 

Little two - year - old Willy. 
Baby Bill. A senator . and 
president. It was an unsettling 
idea. 

The joymaker said, Man For- 
rester! Notice of physical visit. 
Adne Bensen is to see you, pur- 
pose unstated, time of arrival 
less than one minute. 

Oh, said Forrester, good. 
Let her right in. And he re- 
hearsed what he would tell her, 
but not to any effect. Geneaol- 
ogy was not in her mind. She 
was angry. 

You, she cried, what the 
sweat do you think youre doing 
to my kids? 

tt'll^hy, nothing. I dont know 
what youre talking 

about. 

Dog sweat! The door 
crashed closed behind her. 
Twitching kamikaze! She flung 
her cape against the wall; it 
dropped to a chair and arranged 
itself in neat squares. Pervert 
creep, you get a kick out of this, 
dont you? Want to make my 
kids like you! Want to change 



GALAXY 



them into chatter-toothed hand- 
working dogsweaty cowardly   
Forrester guided her to a chair. 
Honey, he said, attempting to 
get her a drink, shut up a min- 
ute. 

Oh, sweet! Give me that   
She quickly produced drinks for 
them, without a pause in her 
talking. My kids! You want to 
ruin them! 

Look, Im sorry, but I didnt 
mean to get them in a danger- 
ous   

Dangerous! Go crawl! Im not 
talking about danger. 

I didnt let them get hurt   
Sweat! 

Well, it isnt my fault if some 
crazy Martian   

Dog sweat! She was wearing 
a skintight coverall which seemed 
to be made of parallel strands of 
fabric running top to bottom, 
held together God knew how; 
with every movement, as she 
turned, as her breast rose and 
fell, tiny slivers of skin showed 
disturbingly. Youre not even 
a man. What do you know 
about   

I said I was sorry. Listen, I 
dont know what I did wrong, but 
Ill make it up to them. 

She sneered. 

No, I will! I know. There 
must be something they want. 
Ive got plenty of money, so   
Charles, youre pathetic! You 
havent got money enough to 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



feed a sick pup  or character 
enough to make him a dog. Go 
rot! 

Now, wait a minute! Were 
not married. You cant talk to 
me like that! He got up and 
stood over her, the glass un- 
heeded in his hand. Now he was 
getting angry, too. He opened his 
mouth to speak, gesticulating. 

Six ounces of icy, sticky fluid 
slopped into her face. 

She stared up at him, and be- 
gan to laugh. 

Oh, Charles! She put down 
her own glass and tried to wipe 
her face. You know youre an 
idiot, dont you? But the way 
she said it was almost affection- 
ate. 

Im sorry, he said. Times, 
lets see, times three, anyway. 
For spilling the drink on you, for 
getting the kids in trouble, for 
yelling back at you   

She stood up and kissed him 
swiftly. As she reached up to 
him the strands of fabric parted 
provocatively. She disappeared 
into the protean cubicle of the 
lavatory. 

Forrester picked up the rest 
of his drink, drank it, drank hers 
and carefully ordered two more 
from the dispenser. His brows 
furrowed with thought. 

When she came back he said, 
Honey, one thing. What did you 
mean when you said I didnt 
have a lot of money? 



51 



S he fluffed her hair, looking ab- 
stracted. 

He said persistently, No, I 
mean it. I mean, I thought you 
knew Kara pretty well. He must 
have told you about me. 

Oh, yes. Of course. 

Well, then. I had this insur- 
ance thing when I died, see. 
They banked the money or some- 
thing, and its had six hundred 
years to grow. Like John Joness 
Dollar, if you know what that 
was. I didnt have much to be- 
gin with, but by the time they 
took me out of the cooler it was 
over a quarter of a million dol- 
lars. 

She picked up her new drink, 
hesitated, then took a drink of it. 
She said, As a matter of fact, 
Charles dear, it was a lot more 
than that. Two million seven 
hundred thousand, Hara said. 
Didnt you ever look at your 
statement? 

Forrester stared. Two million 
sev  Two mill  

Oh, yes. She nodded. Look 
it up. You had the papers with 
you in the tea room yesterday. 
But  but Adne! Somebody 
mustve  1 mean, your kids were 
with me when I deposited the 
check! It was only two hundred 
and some thousand . . 

Dear Charles. Will you please 
look it up in your statement? 
She stood up, looking somewhat 
annoyed and somewhat, he 



thought, embarrassed . 

where the devil did you put i? 
It was a silly joke anyway and 
Im tired of it. 

Numbly he stood up with her, 
numbly found the folder from 
the West Side Discharge Center 
and placed it in her hands What 
joke? If there was a joke, he 
didnt know what it was. 

She fished out the sheaf of 
glossy sheets in the financial re- 
port, glanced at them, began 
handing them to him. The first 
was headed Cryotherapy, Main- 
tenance, Schedule /. It bore a 
list of charges under headings 
like Annual Rental, Biotesting, 
Cell Retrieval and Detoxifica- 
tion, as well as a dozen or more 
recurring items with names that 
meant nothing to him  Schlick- 
Tolhaus Procedures, Homiletic.s 
and so on. The second sheet bore 
a list of charges for what ap- 
peared to be financial servicing, 
presumably investing and super- 
vising his capital. The third was 
for diagnostic procedures, there 
were several for what seemed to 
be separate surgeries, sheets for 
nursing car and for pharmaceu- 
ticals used . there were in all 
nearly thirty sheets and the to- 
tals at the bottom of each of 
them were impressive, but the 
last sheet of all took Forresters 
breath away. 

It was a simple arithmetical 
statement ; 



52 



galaxy 



Aggregate of converted as- 
sets $2,706,884.72 

Aggregate of Schedules 
1-27: $2,443,182.09 

Net due patient on dis- 
charge: $263,702.63 

Forrester gasped and coughed 
and cried, half strangled: Two 
and a half million dollars for 

medical Sweet Jesus God! 

He swallowed and looked up un- 
believingly. Holy A.M.A.! Who 
can afford that kind of money? 
Adne said, Why, you can, for 
one. Otherwise youd still be 
frozen. 

Christ! And   a thought 
struck him  look at this! Even 
so theyre cheating me! It says 
two hundred and sixty thousand,, 
and they only gave me two thir- 
ty! 

Adne was beginning to look 
faintly angry again. Well, after 
all, Charles. You did go back 
there for extra treatment. You 
might get some of that back from 
Heinzie, I dont know. Of course, 
hes protesting it because you 
messed things up. 

He looked at her blankly, then 
back at the statement. He 
groaned. 

Reach me my drink, he said, 
and took a long pull of it. He 
announced, The whole things 
crazy. Millions of dollars for 
doctors! People just cant have 
that much money. 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



You did, she pointed out. 
Given time, people can. At 
compound interest, they can, 
But its  its  its medical 
profiteering! I dont know what 
they did to me, but surely there 
should be some attempt to con- 
trol fees! 

Adne took his arm and sat him 
down again on the couch beside 
her. She said with patience, but 
not very much patience, Dear 
Charles, I wish you would learn 
a little something about the 
world before you tell us all 
whats wrong with it. Do you 
know what they did to you? 
He admitted, Well  Not ex- 
actly, no. But I know something 
about what medical treatment 
costs. He frowned. Or used to, 
anyway. I suppose theres infla- 
tion. 

I dont think so. I  I think 
thats the wrong word, she said. 
I mean, that means things cost 
more because the money is worth 
less, right? But that isnt what 
happened. Those operations 
would have cost just as much 
in the nineteenth century, but   
Twentieth! 

Oh, whats the difference? 
Twentieth, then. That is, they 
would have cost just as much if 
anybody had been able to do 
them. Of course, nobody was. 
Forrester nodded unwillingly. 
All right, I admit Im alive and 
I shouldnt kick. But still   



53 



Impatiently the girl selected 
another document from the sheaf, 
glanced at it and handed it to 
him. Forrester looked, and was 
very nearly sick. Full color, near- 
ly life size, he thought at first 
that it was Lon Chaney made up 
as The Phantom of the Opera. 

But there was no makeup. It 
was a face Or what was left of 
one. 

 He gagged. "What What  
Do you see, Charles? You 
were in bad shape. 

Me? 

Oh, yes, dear. You really 
must read your report. See here. 
Evidently you fell forward into 
the flames. Besides being killed 
the whole anterior section of the 
head was destroyed. At least, the 
soft parts. Mm  lucky your 
brains werent cooked, at that. 
He saw with incredulity that this 
tender, charming girl was study- 
ing the photograph with as little 
passion as though the charred 
meat it represented were a lamb 
chop. She went on, Didnt you 
say you noticed your eyes were 
different? New eyes. 

Forrester croaked, Put that 
thing away. 

He took a swallow of his drink, 
regretted it, fished out what re- 
mained of his second pack of 
cigarettes and lit one. I see what 
you mean, he said at last. 

Do you? Good, deai. You 
know, I bet four or five hundred 

54 



people worked on you. All sorts 
of specialists. All their helpers. 
Using all their equipment. They 
get a case like yours, its like 
one of those great big enormous 
jigsaw puzzles. They have to put 
it all back together, piece by 
piece . only they dont have 
all the pieces, so they have to 
get or make new ones . and of 
course the stuff spoils so. They 
have to   

Quit it! 

"Youre awfully jumpy, Char- 
les. 

All right! Im jumpy. He 
took a deep drag on the ciga- 
rette and asked the question that 
had been developing in his mind 
for ten minutes now. Look. At 
a normal rate of expenditure  
oh, you know; the way you see 
me living  roughly how long is 
my quarter of a million dollars 
going to last? 

She looked into space and 
tapped her teeth. There are 
those custom items of yours, she 
said thoughtfully. They come 
high. Those things you smoke, 
and fowl eggs, and  what was 
that other thing? The oransh 
juice   

Leaving out that kind of 
stuff! How long? 

She pursed her lips. Well, it 
depends. 

Roughly! How long? 

She said, Well, maybe the 
rest of this week. 



GALAXY 



T T e goggled at her. He re- 
pressed a laugh that sound- 
ed like a sob. 

The end of the week? 

He had been building himself 
up to an answer he wouldnt like 
. but this exceeded his expec- 
tations. He said wretchedly, 
Adne  what am I supposed to 
do? 

Well, she said, you could 
always get a job. 

Sure, he said bitterly. Got 
one up your sleeve? One that 
pays a million dollars a week? 
To his surprise she took him 
half seriously. Oh, Charles! Not 
that much. I mean, youre not 
skilled. Twenty, twenty-five 
thousand a day  I dont think 
you can really expect more than 
that. 

He said, You mean you can 
find me a job like that? 

Well, what do you think 
Taiko would have paid? 

Wait a minute! You mean 
Taiko would have given me a 
job? But I thought  I mean, he 
said it was his club  what did 
he call it, the Ned Lud So- 
ciety   

Yes, thats right. She nod- 
ded. But he was quite aston- 
ished at the way you acted, 
Charles. I dont know whether 
hes angry or not. 

Man Forrester! 

The sound of the joymaker 
was almost like an alarm, wak- 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



ening him from sleep. It took him 
a minute to realize what it was, 
emerging from his bemused state. 
Then he said, In a minute, ma- 
chine. Adne, let me get this 
straight   

But she was looking urgent 
and abashed. Charles dear, 
youd better take this message. 
Man Forrester! I have a 
priority notice of personal visit! 
Yeah, but, Adne 
Charles, she said, please 
take it. Or never mind. Ill tell 
you myself. She looked down at 
her hands, avoiding his eyes. I 
guess I should have told you be- 
fore. I think thats Heinzie com- 
ing now. 

Heinzie? The Martian? The 
one   

She said apologetically, I told 
him to come, Charles dear. Youd 
really better let him in. 

VII 

A s Forrester admitted the man 
named Heinzlichen Jura de 
Syrtis Major he was in the state 
described as ready for any- 
thing. What this actually means 
is that he was totally unready. 
He did not know what to expect. 
He could feel his heart pounding; 
he felt that his hands were be- 
ginning to shake. Even Adne 
seemed stimulated; she was 
watching them, her small face 
intensely interested, and she was 

55 



fumbling something out of her 
joymaker. A tranquilizer? No; 
more likely something to pep her 
up, thought Forrester. Whatever 
it was, she popped it in her 
mouth and swallowed before she 
said; Hello, Heinzie. Come on 
in. I think you and Charles have 
met. 

Forrester gave her a look, then 
returned to Heinzlichen. He 
started to put out his hand, then 
stopped, standing on the balls of 
his feet, half ready to shake 
hands, half in something like the 
attack position of karate. Weve 
met, all right. Too damned often. 

Heinzlichen came in, allowed 
the door to close behind him, and 
stood still, studying Forrester like 
a specimen in a museum. Adne 
had been playing with the lights 
again, and mottled reds and yel- 
lows flecked his face. They fit 
his personal color scheme. He 
was a tall, fat man. His hair was 
red, and he wore a close-cut red 
beard that covered all of his face 
except for nose, lips and eyes, 
like the mask of a chimpanzee. 
He rubbed his beard thought- 
fully while he examined Forrest- 
ers face attentively, glanced ap- 
praisingly at his arms and body, 
stared at the stance of his feet 
and finally nodded. He returned 
his gaze to Forresters chest and 
stabbed at it with a finger. He 
said, Dat is where I will kill 
you. Dere. In de heart. 

56 



Forrester exhaled sharply 
through his nose. It tingled. He 
felt the adrenalin flushing 
through his blood. He opened his 
mouth; but Adne cut in swiftly 
before he could speak: 

Heinzie, dear! You prom- 
ised. 

Promised? What promised? 
I promised to talk, dats all. So 
lets talk. 

But Charles doesnt under- 
stand how things are, Heinzie, 
Sit down. Have a drink. 

Oh, sure Ill have a drink. You 
pick me out something nice. But 
make it fast, because I only have 
a couple of minutes. He re- 
turned to Forrester. Well? You 
want to talk? 

Forrester said belligerently, 
Youre damned right I want to 
talk. And no, Adne, I dont want 
a drink. Now, look here, you   
he hesitated, finding it hard to 
think of the right thing to say  
well, what I want to know is, 
why the devil do you want to 
kill me? 

The Martian looked baffled. 
He glanced at Adne helplessly, 
then returned to Forrester. 
Sweat, I dont know, he said. 
Up dere at de party you 
stomped my foot and all . 
but I guess I just dont like you 
anyway. What do you want to 
ask a question like dat for? 
Why? Its my life! 

The Martian growled, I knew 

GALAXY 



dis was a bad idea. Honey, Im 
going. De more I see of dis guy, 
de less I like him. 

But Adne had her hand on his 
ann. Please, Heinzie. Here. 
She handed him a fizzy orange 
drink in a thing like a brandy 
inhaler with a hollow stem. You 
know Charles is just out of the 
sleep-freeze. Hes kind of a slow 
learner, Im afraid. 

Dats his business. Killing 
him, dats my business. But the 
Martian grumpily accepted the 
drink. The girl pressed her ad- 
vantage. 

Yes, but, Heinzie, dear, whats 
the fun of it if he doesnt know 
what its all about? 

Trimmer, Heinzlichen growl- 
ed. Maybe its more fun dat 
way. I cant help dinking we 
lose some of de important values 
when its all so cut and dried. 
All right, I-Ieinzie, maybe 
youre right, but theres such a 
thing as fair play, too. Why, I 
dont even think Charles really 
knows what his rights are. 

The Martian shook his head. 
Dats not my business eider. 
Deres his joymaker; let him 
call up and find out. 

Adne winked reassuringly at 
Forrester, who was not in the 
least reassured. But she seemed 
more confident and relaxed now. 
She leaned back, sipping her 
drink, and said silkily. Wouldnt 
it be nicer for you to talk to him 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



about it? Tell Charles what you 
want to do exactly? 

Oh, dat parts all right. The 
Martian put down his own drink, 
scratched his beard thoughtfully 
and said: Well, its like dis. 1 
want to beat him up good, and 
den I will stomp on his chest 
cage until it breaks and ruptures 
de heart. De reason I like to do 
it dat way is it hurts a lot, and 
you dont get near de brain. Of 
course, he mused, 1 got to 
pay a little more, but de best 
pleasures are de ones you pay 
for. Cheaps cheap. Then his 
expression lightened  or seemed 
to ; the beard hid most of his 
transient looks. Anyway, he 
added, maybe I can get off 
paying de bill. I talked to de 
lawyer and he said Forrester got 
himself in a jam wid de law when 
dis Oder fellow butted in, so may- 
be we can fight de costs. But dat 
doesnt matter in de long run. 
What de hell, if it costs it costs. 

S ^orrester nodded thoughtfully 
and sat down. I believe Ill 
have that drink now, Adne, he 
said. He realized, with a certain 
amount of pride, that he was per- 
fectly calm. 

The reason was that Forrester 
had come to a decision v/hile 
Heinzlichen was talking: he had 
decided to go along with the gag. 
True, it v/asnt really a gag. 
True, when this man said he in- 

57 



tended to cause Forrester a lot 
of pain and ultimate death, he 
meant every word of it. But you 
could not spend your life in 
weighing consequences. You had 
to pretend that the chips were 
only plastic and did not repre- 
sent real currency of any sort, 
otherwise you would lose the 
game out of nerves and panic. 

The very fact that the stakes 
were so important to Forrester 
was a good reason for pretend- 
ing they were only make-believe. 

lie accepted a glass from Adne 
and said reasonably, Now, lets 
get this straight. Did I under- 
stand you right? You talked to a 
lawyer before you tried to kill 
me? 

Neh! Wake up, will you? All 
I did den was file de papers. 

But you just said   

Listen, why dont you? De 
paper,s was so I could kill you  
all de usual stuff, bonds to cover 
de DR business, guaranties 
against damaging de brain and 
like dat. Den de lawyer was just 
yesterday, when I got de idea 
maybe I could kill you and save 
all de bond and guarantie 
money. 

Excuse me. I didnt under- 
stand that part. Forrester nod- 
ded pleasantly, tipped back his 
glass and swallowed it down. 
Another please, Adne, he said, 
thinking hard. 

It began to make a certain 
58 



amount of sense, he realized. The 
thing you had to remember was 
that to these people death was 
not a terminal act but only an 
intermission. 

He said, As I understand it  
I mean, if I understand it  the 
legal part of this business moans 
you have to guarantee to pay my 
freezer costs if you kill me. 
Nah! Not if. Odderwise you 
got it. 

So I dont have anything to 
say about it. The lawyer lets you 
kill me and Im stuck with it. 
Dats right. 

Forrester said thoughtfully, 
But it doesnt sound fair to me, 
everything considered. 

Fair? Of course its fair! Dats 
de whole idea of de guaranties. 
Yes, of course  if the cir- 
cumstances are noinnal. But in 
this case, with death-reversal out 
of the question . . 

The Martian snorted angrily. 
Are you crazy? 

No, really, Forrester per- 
sisted. You said you were going 
to try to get out of paying my 
expenses. You know more about 
it than I do. Suppose you suc- 
ceed? 

Oh, boy! Den you have to 
pay dem yourself. 

Forrester said politely, But 
you see, I dont have any money 
to pay them with. Ask Adne. 
The Martian turned to Adne 
with a look of unbelieving anger, 

GALAXY 



but she said, As a matter of 
fact, Heinzie, Charles is telling 
you the truth. I didnt think of 
it, but its so. I mean, I havent 
checked his balance . but it 
cant be much. 

De hell with his balance! 
What de sweat do I care about 
that I just want to kill him! 
You see. Jura, if you kill 
me   

Shut up, you! 

But the way things are   
Dogsweat! The Martians 
face was working angrily under 
the mask of beard. He was con- 
fused, and mad about it. Whats 
de matter with you, Forrester? 
Why didnt you get a job? 
Well, I will. As soon as I 
can. 

Sweat! You want to chicken 
out, dats all! 

I simply didnt understand 
my money situation. I didnt plan 
it this way. Im sorry. Jura, I 
really am, but   

Shut up! barked the Martian. 
Look, I got no more time for 
dis talk. I have to go to de re- 
hearsal hall, were doing de 
Schumann lieder and Im de 
soloist. Answer de question. Do 
you want to chicken out? 

Well, said Forrester, fiddling 
with his glass and casting a side- 
long glance at Adne, yes. 
Fink! Dogsweat fink! 

I knov7 how you feel. I guess 
Id feel the same way. 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



De hell with how youd feci. 
All right, look. Im not promis- 
ing anything, but Ill talk to de 
lawyer again and see where de 
hell we stand. Meanwhile, you 
get a job, hear? 

F orrester showed the Martian 
out. He was feeling elated. 
He stood thoughtfully at the 
door, testing the feeling. For a 
man who had just discovered he 
was a pauper, who had reinforced 
the dislike of an enemy who pro- 
posed to kill him, Forrester was 
feeling pretty good. Probably it 
was all in an illusion, he thought 
fatalistically. 

Adne was curled up on the 
couch, study .ing him. She had 
been doing something with the 
lights again; now they were 
misty blue, and her skin gleamed 
through the lacy strands of her 
coverall. Perhaps she had been 
doing something with that, too; 
it seemed to be showing more of 
Adne than it had earlier. For- 
rester excused himself and went 
into the little lavatory room to 
splash cold water on his face: 
And then he realized the cause of 
his elation. 

He had managed to win a 
point. 

He was not a bit sure it was 
a worthwhile point; he wasnt 
even quite sure of what he had 
won. But for better or for worse, 
he had won a small victory over 

59 



Heinzlichen Jura de Syrtis 
Major. For days Forrester had 
been a cork bobbing to the 
thrusts of every passerby; now 
he was thrusting back. He came 
smiling back into the room and 
cried: I want a drink! 

Adne was still on the couch, 
murmuring into her joymaker. 
  and be sure youre locked 
up, she was saying, dont for- 
get your prophylaxis and good 
night, Mim. She put it down 
and looked up at him. Her ex- 
pression was sulky but enter- 
tained. 

The kids? She nodded. My 
God, is it that late? He had for- 
gotten the passage of time. Im 
sorry. I mean, what about their 
dinners and all? 

She looked slightly less sulky, 
slightly more entertained. Oh, 
Charles! You werent thinking I 
had to boil oatmeal or peel po- 
tatoes? Theyve had their din- 
ners, of course. 

Oh. Well. I guess we should 
be thinking about ours   

Not yet. 

Forrester said, reorienting his 
thinking very quickly. All right. 
Then what about that drink? 
Im not thirsty, you fool. 
She lifted her joymaker, looked 
him over with narrowed eyes, 
kissed the soft spot at the base 
of his throat and touched it with 
the joymaker. 

Forrester felt a sudden urge in- 



side him. It was like a mild elec- 
tric shock, like a whiff of mingled 
oxygen and musk. 

Adne studied him critically, 
then leaned forward and kissed 
him on the lips. 

A moment later he said, Do 
that again. 

She did. Then she lay back 
against him with her head on his 
shoulder. 

Dear Charles, she said, 
youre such a nut. 

He stroked her and kissed her 
hair. The parallel-strand fabric 
did not feel coarse or wirey; lie 
could hardly tell it was there. 

I dont know if you did the 
right thing with Heinzie, she 
said meditatively. Its kind of 
 you know. Almost chicken 
. . Then she turned inside his 
arm and kissed his ear. I know 
it embarrasses you when I talk 
biology, but  well, the reason 
Im natural-flow, you see, is Im 
a natural type of girl. Do you 
understand? 

Sure, he lied, hardly even 
hearing her. 

I mean, if you want to you 
can take the pills and use chem- 
osimulants and its just about the 
same. But I dont do that, be- 
cause if youre going to do that, 
you might just as well go all the 
way and use the joy machine. 

I can see that, all right, he 
said, but she fended him off and 
added: 



60 



GALAXY 



"Slii, one doesnt have to be 
Cjinetimes youre at a low 
point, and something special hap-  
pens and youd like to be at a 
high point. Then you can take a 
pill if you want to, do you see? 

Oh, yes! Say! said Forrester, 
pleasantly excited, I wonder! 
How would you feel about taking 
a pill now? 

She sat up, stretched and put 
her arms around him. Dont 
have to, she said, resting her 
cheek against his. I took one 
when you let Heinzie in. 

^J^ith two victories in one day, 
thought Forrester in a mood 
of pleasant triumph and lassi- 
tude, this world could come pret- 
ty close to his first hopes for it 
after all. After the girl had gone 
he slept for ten good hours, and 
woke with the conviction that 
everything would come out right. 
The father of a president and the 
lover of Adne Bensen was, at 
least in his own eyes, a figure of 
much mana. There were prob- 
lems. But he would cope with 
them. 

He ordered breakfast and add- 
ed: Machine! How do I go 
about getting a job? 

If you will state parameters, 
Man Forrester, I will inform you 
as to openings which may be 
suitable. 

You mean what kind of job? 

I dont know what kind. Just so 

THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



it pays   he coughed before he 
could get the figure out  around 
ten million bucks a year. 

But the joymaker took it in 
stride. Yes, Man Forrester. 
Please inform me further as to 
working conditions  home or ex- 
ternal; mode of payment  
straight cash or fringed; if fringe, 
nature permitted  profit-shar- 

ing, stock issue, allocated earn- 
ings bonus, or other; categories 
not to be considered; religious, 
moral or political objections, not 
stated in your record profile, 
which may debar classes of em- 
ploy 

Slow down a minute, ma- 
chine. Let me think. 

Certainly, Man Forrester. 
Will you receive your messages 
now? 

No. I mean, he added cau- 
tiously, not unless there are 
some life and death ones, like 
that Martian being out to kill me 
again. But there werent. That, 
too, thought Forrester with pleas- 
ure, set this day off from other 
days. 

He ate thoughtfully and eco- 
nomically, bathed, put on clean 
clothes and allowed himself an 
extremely expensive cigarette be- 
fore he tackled the joymaker 
again. Then he said: Tell you 
what you do, machine. Just give 
me an idea of what jobs are 
open. 

I cannot sort them unless you 

61 



give me parameters, Man For- 
rester. 

Thats right. Dont sort them. 
Just give me an idea of whats 
going. 

Very well, Man Forrester. I 
will give you direct crude read- 
out of new listings as received in 
real time. Marking. Mark! Item, 
curvilinear phase-analysis major, 
seventy-five hundred. Item, chef, 
full manual, cordon-bleu exper- 
ience, eighteen thousand. Item, 
poll subjects, detergents and 
stress-control appliance, no ex- 
perience required, six thousand. 
Item, child-care domestics  but, 
Man Forrester, the joymaker 
broke in on itself, that clearly 
specifies female employment. 
Shall I eliminate the obviously 
inappropriate listings? 

No. I mean, yes. Eliminate 
the whole thing for now. I get the 
idea. But it was confusing, 
thought Forrester uncomforta- 
bly; the salaries mentioned were 
hardly higher than twentieth- 
century scales They would not 
support a Pekingese pup in this 
era of joyful extravagance. I 
think ni go see Adne, he said 
suddenly, and aloud. 

The joymaker chose to reply. 
Very well, Man Forrester, but 
I must inform you as to a Class 
Gamma alert. Transit outside 
your own dwelling will be inter- 
rupted for drill purposes. 

Oh. God. An air raid? 



A drill, Man Forrester. ' 
Sure. Well, how long is that 
going to go on? 

Perhaps five minutes, Man 
Forrester. 

Oh, well, thats not so bad. 
I tell you what, why dont you 
give me my messages while Im 
waiting. 

Yes, Man Forrester. There is 
one personal and nine commer- 
cial. The personal message is 
from Adne Bensen and follows. 
Forrester felt the light touch of 
Adnes hand, then the whisper of 
Adnes voice: Dear Charles, 
her voice whispered, see me 
again soon, you dragon! And 
you know we have to think about 
something, dont you? We have 
to decide on a name. 

VIII 

'^XT^hen he reached Adnes 
^ apartment the children let 
him in. Hello, Tunt, he said. 
Hello, Mim. 

They stared at him curiously, 
then at each other. Blew it again, 
he thought in resignation; it must 
be the girl thats Tunt, the boy 
thats Mim. But he had long since 
decided that if he tried to track 
down all his little errors he would 
have time for nothing else, and 
he was determined not to be de- 
railed. Wheres your mother? 
he asked. 

Out, 



62 



GALAXY 



Do you know where? For- 
rester asked. 

Uh-huh. 

Forrester said patiently, 
Would you like to tell me? 

The boy and girl looked at 
each other thoughtfully. Then 
the boy said. Well, not par- 
ticularly, Charles. Were kind of 
busy. 

Forrester had always thought 
of himself as a man who liked 
children but, although he smiled 
at these two, the smile was be- 
coming forced. I guess I can 
call her up on the joymaker, he 
said. 

The boy looked scandalized. 

"Now? While shes crawling? 

Forrester sighed. Look, fel- 
lows, I want to talk to your 
mother about something. How do 
you recommend I go about it? 

You could wait here, I guess, 
the boy said reluctantly. 

If you have to, added the 
girl. 

I get the impression you dont 
want me around. What are you 
kids doing? 

Well   the boy overruled 
his sister with a look and said 
sheepishly  were having a 
meeting. 

But please dont tell Taiko! 
cried the girl. 

He doesnt like our club, the 
boy finished. 

Just the two of you? 

Sweet sweat, no! laughed the 



boy. Lets see. There are eleven 
of us. 

Twelve! the girl crowed. I 
bet you forgot the robot again. 
Maybe I did. You and me, 
Tunt. Four boys. Three girls. A 
grown-up. A Martian . and 
the robot. Yeah, twelve. 

You mean a Martian like 
Heinzlichen whats-his-name? 
Oh, no, Charles! Heinzies a 
dope, but hes people. This is 
one of the big green ones with 
four arms. 

Forrester did a double-take, 
then said, You mean like in Ed- 
gar Rice Burroughs? But  but 
I didnt think those were real   
The boy looked politely inter- 
ested. Yes? What about it? 
What do you mean by real, 
Charles? asked the girl. 

I n the old days before Forres- 
ter died he had been a sci- 
ence-lover. It had always seemed 
to him wonderful and exciting 
that he should be living in an 
age where electricity came from 
wall sockets and living pictures 
from a box on a bench. He had 
thought sometimes, with irony 
and pity, of how laughably in- 
competent some great mind of 
the past, a Newton or Archime- 
des, would have been to follow 
his own six-year-olds instructions 
about tuning a television set or 
operating his electric trains. So 
here I am, he thought wryly, the 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



63 



bushman in Times Square. If a 
not much fun. 

But by careful and single- 
minded questioning he got some 
glimpse of what the children were 
talking about. Their playmates 
were not real, but they were 
a lot realer than, say, a Betsy- 
Wetsy doll. They were analogues 
 simulacra  the children call- 
ed thern simulogs, when press- 
ed. The little girl said proudly 
that they were very good at de- 
veloping inter-personal relation- 
ships. Got that much, said 
Charles, or anyway I think I 
do. So what does Taiko have to 
do with it? 

Oh, him! 

He doesnt like anything thats 
fun. 

Says were losing the will to 
cope with  with what you said, 
Charles. Reality.  

And all that sweat, added 
the girl. Say! Would you like 
to hear him? 

She glanced toward the view- 
well, now showing a placid back- 
ground scene of woody glades 
and small furry animals. You 
mean on the television? For- 
rester asked. 

The what, Charles?" 

On that. 

Thats right, Charles. 

Well, said Forrester . 

And thought that, after all, he 
might as well. If worst came to 
worst, he could take up Taikos 

64 



offer of " a ^ job, assuming it was 
still open; and before he came 
to that worst he would be better 
off to known something about it. 
Display away, he said. What 
have I got to lose? 

^"T^he viewing wall, obedient to 
the little girls orders, wash- 
ed out the forest glade and re- 
placed it with a stage. On it a 
man in a fright wig was bound- 
ing about and howling. 

With difficulty Forrester rec- 
ognized the blond, crew-cut 
visitor he had so unceremonious- 
ly got rid of  when? Was it 
only a couple of days ago? Taiko 
was doing a sort of ceremonial 
step dance, a couple of paces in 
one direction and a stomp; a 
couple of paces away, and an- 
other stomp. And what he was 
shouting seemed like gibberish to 
Forrester: 

Lud, lords, led nobly! 
(Stomp!) Let Lud lead, lords 
(stomp!), lest lone, lorn lads lapse 
loosely (stomp!) into limljo! 
(Stomp!) He faced forward and 
threw his arms wide. The camera 
zoomed in on his impassioned, 
tortured face. Jeez, kids! You 
want to get your goddam brains 
scrambled? You want to be a 
juiceless jellyfish If you dont, 
then  let Lud lead! (Stomp!) 
Let Lud lead! (Stomp!) Let Lud 
lead   

The boy cried over the noise 

GALAXY 



From the view wall: Now hes 
going to ask for comments from 
the viewers. This is where we 
usually send in things to make 
tiim mad like. Go back in the 
freezer, you old icy cube and 
'Taikos a dirty old Utopian! CH 
course, we dont give our names. 
Today I was going to send in. 
If it was up to people like you 
wed still be swinging from our 
tails like apes,  said the girl 
thoughtfully, but it probably 
wouldnt make him very mad. 
Forrester coughed. Actually, 
Id just as soon not make him 
mad. I may have to go to work 
for him. 

The children stared at him, dis- 
mayed. The boy extinguished 
Taikos image on the view-wall 
and cried, Please, Charles, dont 
do that! Mim said you turned 
him down. 

I did, but I may have to re^ 
consider; I have to get some kind 
of a job. Matter of fact, thats 
why Im here. 

Oh, good, said the girl. 
Mimll get you a job. Wont she, 
Tunt? 

If she can, the boy said un- 
certainly. What can you do? 
Thats one of my problems. 
But there has to be something; 
Im running out of money. 
They did not respond to that, 
merely looked at him wide-eyed. 
They not only looked astonished, 
they looked embarrassed. 



At length the little girl sighed 
and said, Charles, youre so 
sweaty ignorant I could freeze. I 
never heard of anybody being 
out of money, cept the Forgotten 
Men. Dont you know how to get 
a job? 

Not very well. 

You use the joymaker, the 
boy said patiently. 

Sure. I tried that. 

The boy looked excited. You 
mean  look, Charles, you want 
me to help you? Cause I will. I 
mean, we had that last year in 
Phase Five. All you have to do 
is   

His expression suddenly be- 
came crafty. Oh, sweat, Char- 
les, he said carelessly, let me 
do it for you. Just, uh, tell it to 
listen to me. 

Forrester didnt need the girls 
look of thrilled shock to warn 
him. Nope, he said firmly. Ill 
wait for your mother to come 
home. 

The boy grinned and surren- 
dered. All right. Charles. I just 
wanted to ask it something about 
Mims other, uh, friends. Well, 
heres what you do. Tell it you 
want to be tested for an employ- 
ability profile and then you want 
recommendations. 

I dont exactly know what 
that involves, Forrester said 
cautiously. 

The boy sighed. You dont 
have to, Charles. Just do it. What 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



65 



the sweat do you think the joy- 
makers for? 

\ nd actually, it turned out 
pretty easy, although the 
employability profile testing 
involved some rather weird ques- 
tions  

What is God? 

Are your stools black and 
tarry? 

If you happened to be a girl, 
would you wish you were a boy? 

Assume there are Plutonians. 
Assume there are elves. If elves 
attacked Pluto without warning, 
whose side would you be on? 

Why are you better than any- 
one else? 

Most of the questions were like 
that. Some were worse  either 
totally incomprehensible to For- 
rester, or touching on matters 
that made him blush and glance 
uneasily at the children. But the 
children seemed to take it as a 
matter of course, and indeed 
grew bored before long and wan- 
dered back to their own view- 
wall, where they watched what 
seemed to be a news broadcast. 
Forrester growled out the an- 
swers as best he could, having 
come to the conclusion that the 
machine knew what it was doing 
even if he didnt. The answers, 
of course, made no more sense 
than the questions ; tardily he 
realized that the joymaker was 
undoubtedly monitoring his ner- 



vous system and learning more 
from the impulses that raced 
through his brain than from his 
words, anyway. Which was con- 
firmed when, at the end of the 
questions, the joymaker said: 
Man Forrester, we will now ob- 
serve you until you return to rest 
state. I will then inform you as 
to employability. 

Forrester stood up, stretched 
and looked around the room. He 
could not help feeling that he 
had been through an ordeal. Be- 
ing reborn was nearly as much 
trouble as being born in the first 
place. 

The children were discussing 
the scene on the view-wall, which 
seemed to show a crashed airlin- 
er surrounded by emergency 
equipment, on what appeared to 
be a mountain-top somewhere. 
Men and machines were dousing 
it with chemical sprays and 
carrying out injured and dead  
if they made that distinction  
on litters, to what Forrester rec- 
ognized by the ruby caduceus as 
death-reversal vehicles. The 
mountainside was dotted with 
what looked like pleasure craft  
tiny, bright-colored aircraft that 
had no visible business there, 
and that seemed to be occupied 
by sightseers. No doubt they 
were, thought Forrester  reiiu'in- 
bering the crowds that had stood 
by the night he was burned to 
death, heedless of icy spiny, icy 



66 



GALAXY 



winds and irritated police trying 
to push them back. 

Old Haps never going to 
make it, said the boy to the girl, 
and looked up to see Forrester. 
Oh, youre done? 

Forrester nodded. A drone 
from the view-wall saying,  
made it again, with a total to this 
minute of thirty-one and fifty- 
five, out of a possible ninety- 
eight. Not bad for the Old Mas- 
ter! Yet Hap still trails the 
rookie Maori from Pore Mores- 
by   

What are you watching? he 
asked. 

Just the semi-finals, said the 
boy. Howd you make out on 
your tests? 

I dont have the results yet. 
The screen flickered and showed 
a new picture, a sort of stylized 
star-map with arrows and dots 
of green and gold. Forrester said, 
Is ten million a year too much 
to ask for? 

Sweat, Charles! How would 
we know? The boy was clearly 
more interested in the view-wall 
than in Forrester, but he was 
polite enough to add: Tunts 
projected life average is about 
twelve million a year. Mines fif- 
teen. But of course weve got uh, 
more advantages, he said deli- 
cately. 

Forrester sat down and re- 
signed himself to waiting for the 
results. The arrows and circles 



were moving about the star-map, 
and a voice was saying:   probe 
reports from 61 Cygni, Proxima 
Centauri, Epsilon Indi and Cor- 
doba 31353 show no sign of arti- 
factual activity and no change in 
net systemic energy levels. 

Dopes! shrilled the little 
girl. They couldnt find a Mar- 
tian in a mattress. 

  at Groombridge 1830, how- 
ever, the unidentified object 
monitored six days ago shows no 
sign of emission and has been 
tentatively identified as a large 
comet, although its anecliptic or- 
bit marks this large and massive 
intruder as a potential trouble 
spot. Needless to say, it is being 
carefully watched, and SEPF 
headquarters in Federal City an- 
nounce that they are phasing two 
additional monitors out of their 
passive orbits . . 

What are they talking 
about? Forrester asked the boy. 

The war, of course. Shut up, 
wont you? 

  Well, theres good news to- 
night from 22H Camelopardis! 
A late bulletin just received from 
sortie-control headquarters states 
that the difficult task of replac- 
ing the damaged probe has beenj 
completed! The first of the re-, 
placements rushed out from BO 
7899 has achieved stellar orbit 
in a near-perfect, almost circular 
orbit, and all systems are go. 
Seven back-up replacements   



fHE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



67 



Sweat, said the girl. What 
a tedious war! Charles, you 
used to do things better didnt 
you? 

In what way? 

The girl looked puzzled. More 
killing, of course. 

If you call that better, maybe 
we did. World War Two killed 
like twenty million people, I 
think. 

Weep. Twenty million'' 
breathed the girl. And so far 
weve killed, what is it, Tunt? 
Twenty-two? 

Twenty-two million? asked 
Forrester. 

The boy shook his head dis- 
gustedly. Twenty-two individ- 
ual Sirians. Isnt that rotten? 

T)ut before Forrester could an- 
swer his joymaker spoke up: 

Man Forrester! Your tests 
have been integrated and as- 
sayed. May I display the tran- 
script on Bensen children equip- 
ment? 

Go ahead, the boy said sul- 
lenly. Cant be any worse than 
that." 

The star-map disappeared 
from the wall and was replaced 
by shimmering sine-waves, punc- 
tuated with numbers that were 
quite meaningless to Forrester. 
You may apply for re-evalua- 
tion on any element of the pro- 
file, if you wish. Do you wish to 
do this, Man Forrester? 



Hell, no. The numbers and 
graphs were not only meaningless 
but disturbing. Forrester had a 
flash of memory which he iden- 
tified as coming from the last 
time a government agency had 
concerned itself with finding him 
a job  after his discharge from 
the peacetime conscription term, 
when he joined the long lines of 
unemployables telling their lies 
to a bored State Employment 
Service clerk. He could almost 
see the squares of linoleum on 
the floor, the queues of those 
who, like himself, wanted only 
to collect unemployment insur- 
ance for a while, in the hope that 
the world would clarify itself to 
them. 

But the joymaker was talking: 
Your profile, Man Forrester, 
indicates relatively high employ- 
ability in personal-service and 
advocative categories. I have se- 
lected ninety-three possible open- 
ings. Shall I give you the list? 
My God, no. Just give me 
the one you like best. 

Your optimum choice, Man 
Forrester, is as follows: Salary, 
seventeen thousand five hundred. 
This is rather less than your 
stated requirements, but an ex- 
pense   

Hold on a minute! Ill say its 
less! I was asking for ten mil- 
lion! 

Yes, Man Forrester. You 
stated ten million per year. This 



68 



GALAXY 



is seventeen thousand five hun- 
dred per day. At four-day week 
norm, allowing for projected 
overtime as against health losses, 
three million eight hundred thou- 
sand dollars per year. Expenses 
are also included, however, op- 
timized at five million plus in 
addition to salary. 

Wait a minute. The numbers 
were so large as to be dizzying. 
He turned to the children. 
Thats almost nine million a 
year. Can I live on that? 

Sweat, Charles, sure, if you 
want to. 

Forrester took a deep breath. 
Ill take it, he said. 

'"^he joymaker did not seem 
particularly concerned. Very 
well, Man Forrester. Your duties 
are as follows: Conversation. 

Briefing. Discussion. The orien- 
tation is timeless, so your status 
as a recent disfreeze will not be 
a handicap. You will be expected 
to answer questions and be avail- 
able for discussions, usually re- 
mote due to habitat considera- 
tions. Some travel is indicated. 
Sweat. The Bensen children 
showed signs of interest; the boy 
sat up and his sister stared wide- 
eyed at Forrester. 

Supplementary information, 
Man Forrester: This employer 
has rejected automated services 
for heuristic reasons. His desid- 
eratum is subjectivity rather than 



accuracy of data. The employer 
is relatively unfamiliar with hu- 
man history, culture and cus- 
toms   

It fs! cried the girl. 

  and will supplement your 
services with TIC data as need- 
ed. Forrester cut in. Never 
mind that. Where do I go for my 
interview? 

Man Forrester, you have had 
it. 

You mean Ive got the job? 
But  but what do I do next? 

Man Forrester, I was outlin- 
ing the procedure. Please note 
the following signal. There was 
a mellow, booming chime. This 
will indicate a message from your 
employer. Under the terms of 
your employment contract you 
may not decline to accept these 
messages during the hours of ten 
hundred to fourteen hundred on 
working days. You are further 
required to receive such messages 
with no more than twelve hours 
delay even on non-worldng days. 

And that, thought Forrester, 
was that. 

Except for trying to find out 
what was bugging the kids. He 
said, All right. Whats eating 
you? 

They were whispering togeth- 
er, their eyes on him. The boy 
stopped long enough to ask, 
Eating us, Charles? 

Why are you acting like 
that? Forrester amended. 



THE AGE OF THE PUSSYFOOT 



69 



Oh, nothing, the boy said. 
Nothing important  correct- 
ed the girl. 

Come on! 

The little girl said, Its just 
that we never knew anybody 
whod work for them before. 
Work for who? 

The joymaker told you, Char- 
les! Dont you listen? said the 
boy, and the girl chimed in: 
Sweat, Charles! Dont you 
know who youre working for? 
Forrester took a deep breath 
and glared at them. He told him- 
self that they were only children, 
and that in fact he was rather 
fond of them; but they seemed 
on this particular morning to be 
determined to drive him mad. 
He sat down and picked up his 
joymaker. Carefully he scanned 
the cluster of buttons until he 
found the crystal-clear, rounded 
one he was looking for, turned 
the joymaker until its spray- 
nozzle was pointing at the ex- 
posed flesh on his arm and 
pressed the button. 

Happily it was the right but- 
ton. What the fine mist that 
danced into his wrist might be 
he did not know, but it achieved 



the expected effect. It was like a 
super- tranquilizer; it cleared his 
mind, quieted his pulse and en- 
abled him to say, quite calmly, 
Machine! Just who the hell have 
you got me working for? 

Do you wish me to display a 
picture of your employer, Man 
Forrester? 

You damn bet I wish! 
Please observe the view-wall, 
Man Forrester. 

And observe it Forrester did; 
and swallowed hard, stunned. 

In all justice to the joymaker, 
Forrester was forced to admit 
that he had placed no restrictions 
on its choice of an employer for 
him. He had been willing to ac- 
cept almost anything, but all the 
same he was surprised. 

He hadnt expected his em- 
ployer to have bright green fur, 
or a diadem of tiny eyes, peering 
out of a ruff around a pointed 
head, or tentacles. He had not, 
in fact, expected it to be one of 
The Enemy, the race whose pres- 
ence in space had scared man- 
kind into a vast series of raid 
drills, weapons-programs and 
space probes ... in short, a Sir- 
ian. ^ 



TO BE CONTINUED 

     



70 



GALAXY 



INSIDE 



by H. L. GOLD 




He seemed fo be reading minds. 
Bui whose? They certainly did 
not belong io anybody be knew! 



T ester Shay was married three 
months when he got his first 
Erector set. Thalia, noting that 
he felt tired and rundown, or- 
dered him to get a checkup. Too 
tired and rundown to object, he 
went to see Dr. Peabody. 

Very surprising, the physi- 
cian said after an embarrassingly 
thorough examination. Married 
three months, beautiful, affec- 
tionate bride  but you get plen- 
ty of sleep, outdoors a lot, a 
moderate amount of exercise. 

I do all my own marketing, 
said Les, who owned a wholesale 
grocery business. I walk every 
chance I get, which is consider- 
able. Marketing is all outdoors, 
you know. And I have to get to 
sleep early, because if I dont get 
up early, my competitors   



Exactly. And I know its not 
overwork. Im overworked my- 
self, but Im in tiptop condition. 

How do you manage it? ask- 
ed Les, interested in a tired, run- 
down way. 

A hobby, said Dr. Peabody. 

Gardening? Raising tropical 
fi,sh? Golf? 

The last thing youd expect, 
Dr. Peabody said, leaning for- 
ward excitedly. I know a lot of 
dentists. They give me old fillings 
and Ive got this little smelter, 
see, and I break down the amal- 
gam into silver and mercury, 
then sell the stuff back to the 
dentists. Darn near pays for it- 
self! And fun? You ought to come 
visit my basement sometime! 

Shambling home, Les wonder- 
ed what he could take up as a 



71 



hobby. Nightclubs and theaters 
wouldnt do. They let out too late. 
Besides, they werent a hobby. 
Raising things was too close to 
his actual work; it would make 
him think about produce and 
canned goods. He did enough 
outdoor walking to eliminate 
sports. 

That was when he saw the 
Erector set in the store window. 

T T e stopped and studied it, 
looking more wistful now 
than tired or rundown. He had 
always wanted an Erector set, 
but his parents, believers in as 
the twig is bent so grows the 
tree, had refused to buy him one. 
They didnt, they explained, want 
their son to become a mechanic. 
Not, mind you, theyd added, 
that there was anything wrong 
with mechanics. But he was wor- 
thy of great things. They had 
also been disappointed when he 
went into the wholesale grocery 
line, were more pleased now be- 
cause he was doing well in it, but 
that wasnt important. He still 
wanted an Erector set. 

When he got home, Thalia 
looked expectantly at the large, 
heavy box. He had bought the 
biggest and most expensive set, 
of course. 

Oh, something for the house? 
she asked, obviously hoping it 
wasnt. 

Doctor said I needed a hobby 
72 



or something, he explained un- 
comfortably. 

Wonderful! she exclaimed. 
We can do it together! 

You mean you like working 
on Erector sets, too? he cried. 

Oh, she said. Well, thats 
really a  well, a mans hobby. 

She gave him the room that 
would some day be a nursery 
and he built a parachute jump, 
a stake truck, a windmill and a 
ski tow. The spring came back 
to his walk and the roses to his 
cheeks. 

But less than a week later, ly- 
ing in bed with his bride in his 
arms, he could sense the old tired, 
rundown feeling creep up on 
him. 

Whats the matter, darling? 
Thalia asked, disconcerted. Is it 
the onions I had for dinner?* 

Oh, no, sweetheart! he tried 
to answer hastily, only it came 
out a slow sigh. Its the Erector 
set. 

The  Erector set? Oh! The 
Erector set. Well, if its broken, 
darling, you can always buy an- 
other. 

Its not broken. That isnt the 
trouble, he sighed again, and 
turned over and moodily went to 
sleep. 

The problem was still on his 
mind in the pre-dawn at the mar- 
ket. Kale was coming in nicely 
and he had bought all the primes 
offered by the farmers. He mor- 

GALAXY 



osely helped Arnie, his driver, 
load up. 

What happened to the old 
zip? Amie asked concernedly. 
You were feeling great for a 
while. Down in the dumps 
again? 

I guess so, said Les. Tem- 
porarily, at least. I hope. 

You ought to try tooling one 
of these monmouths through city 
traffic. Gotta judge every inch 
of the way. Boy, you drive one 
and I bet you wont have a min- 
ute to   

Les found himself listening in- 
tently, but not to Arnies good- 
natured chatter. Something was 
wrong. He knew it was wrong. 
But what? 

No, not like walking barefooted 
in spilled sugar, he mused. 
Though it was a little like that 
 sort of gritty. But painful, too. 
As if he were trying to run with 
a sore socket in his leg. 

Youve got a bearing burning 
out, Les interrupted. 

Arnie took a fast glance at him. 
Since when you know about 
motors, Boss? 

A bearing, said Les. Thats 
what it feels like. 

Les nodded at a service sta- 
tion up ahead. Pull in there. I 
want to have it checked. 

'"T^he garageman examined the 
motor and found a bearing 
rubbed so raw that Les had to 

INSIDE MAN 



turn away in compassion and 
disgust. He left Arnie, puzzled 
enough to be silent for once, at 
the service station and walked 
alone the rest of the way to the 
office. 

Les discovered he was sur- 
rounded by sensations ranging 
from purrs of pleasure all the 
way to groans of pain. One purr 
came from a trim little Porscht 
 new tune-up job, a little heavy 
on the grease, but that would 
thin out on the straightaway, he 
thought, and the unexpected 
thought alarmed him. 

Thought? He considered. It 
was a feeling, a very strong and 
explicit emotion. So was the sym- 
pathy for a passing cab that real- 
ly wanted to lie down on some 
nice, restful junkpile. A painful 
click, click bothered him. He 
looked up. It was a tower clock, 
desperately clawing its way 
around the hours on eroded cams. 
Damn the sadists who would put 
a conscientious servant through 
such torture, he thought angrily. 

But he felt equally guilty 
when he came into the office and 
heard Miss Zeichner typing. The 
dogs in the escape mechanism 
were practically howling and the 
keys were moving only because 
her slim but powerful fingers 
were beating them into moving. 

Leave that alone! Les said, 
more sharply than hed intended. 
I mean, no more typing for to- 

73 



day, he amended when she 
jumped and looked frightened. 

But the filings all done and 
I have a perfect mess of corres- 
pondence to get out, she ob- 
jected. If I dont do it today 
 

Not on that battered hulk, 
he told her. 

He called and ordered a new 
electric typewriter. Miss Zeichner 
was, as she put it, thrilled. He 
shrugged. She always was either 
thrilled or absolutely  com- 
pletely and absolutely  shatter- 
ed. But only over unimportant 
things. 

For instance, was she com- 
pletely and absolutely shattered 
by the pained limpings and 
clenched-teeth determination to 
do a job, to keep those pistons 
pumping no matter what the cost; 
completely and absolutely thrill- 
ed by the sleek, contented mur- 
murs, the happy little laughs of 
conscious strength, easy power, 
the cared-for feeling; or com- 
pletely and absolutely dismayed 
by the breathless puffing under a 
merciless load, like  

He listened sharply. He felt 
more sharply still. 

It came from the warehouse 
behind the office. He sprang out 
of his seat savagely enough to 
upset Miss Zeichner again, raced 
into the warehouse. 

A valiant little fork-lift truck, 
overloaded by half again too 
74 



many cases of canned salmon, 
was almost red-faced with strain. 

Les leaped aboard, switched off 
the motor, hauled out the man, 
shoved him against the wall and 
started a murderous swing. 

Mr. Shay! yelped the man. 
What did I do wrong? 

It was Walts voice. Les blink- 
ed, dropped his fist, slumped. 

Sorry, Walt, he mumbled. 
Guess Im all on edge today. 
You had that fork-lift overload- 
ed and it  it jarred me. Sorry. 
Walt picked his shirt button 
up off the floor. Hell, Mr. Shay, 
its all right. Id probably feel 
the same if somebody was ruin- 
ing my property. 

 Property \ shouted Les, going 
for him again. Things like ma- 
chines  property] 

Arnie, back while his truck 
was being repaired, caught Les 
from behind and held and sooth- ' 
ed him into the office. 

Youre all tensed up. Boss, 
Amie said. Ill get you a cab 
and you can go home and take a 
hot bath and relax with your slip- 
pers and bathrobe and newspa- 
per. How about it, huh? 

I suppose so, Les muttered. 
Im not much help today. 

The cab was in good shape 
 that new pinion hurt a little, 
but it would break in soon  
and Les sat back, easing, and 
even joined the comfortable, un- 
worried motor hum. 



GALAXY 



T ike all affectionate brides, 
' beautiful or otherwise, when 
their husbands come home half a 
day early, Thalia was flattered 
and coy, then concerned when he 
abstractedly pecked her only 
once to her dozens of kisses on 
the face and mouth and ears and 
neck, then relieved when he told 
her he wasnt sick, and finally de- 
lighted because now he could 
help plan the menu for tonight. 
Menu? he repeated. 

The Fitches are coming for 
dinner. 

Fitch? Fitch  good God  
he has seventeen stores  if I 
get the account  what do you 
mean, menu? Cavier, bluepoints, 
vichysoisse, filet mignon, breast 
of guinea hen   

Darling, she said. Mr. 
Fitch has an ulcer. 

Ulcer, said Les. Milk and 
crackers. Cottage cheese. 
What about that new line of 
dietetic food you said you could 
tie up if you only had the out- 
lets? 

Hey! he cried. Whyd I 
have to go marry you and lose 
the best office manager I ever 
had? 

Because it was one or the oth- 
er. 

He gave her a dirty grin. 
Well, I was tired of being a 
working girl, she 'said defen- 
sively. Every real, honest-to- 
goodness woman wants   
INSIDE MAN 



I know what every real, hon- 
est-to-goodness woman wants. 
Lets let the menu wait, because 
every real, honest-to-goodness 
man wants what every real, hon- 
est-to-goodness woman   

She wriggled out of his arms. 
And with me going frantic? I 
was going to phone you to pick 
up those dietetic foods and bring 
them home with you tonight. 
Now well have to get a special 
messenger. 

Yeah, he said. Its frus- 
trating, but youre right. Why 
cant Miss Zeichner   

Oh, shell learn, darling. Just 
give her time. 

Hah! he said. Why, you 
wouldnt believe it, but   

The menu, she told him 
firmly. And the messenger. 

ti'V^ell, look, damn it, Les 
argued the next morning, 
waiting for an elevator with Tha- 
lia in the Medical Building. Just 
because I didnt get the Fitch ac- 
count is no reason to haul me to a 
psychiatrist! 

Lower your voice. People are 
looking, she shushed. It isnt 
that and you know it, darling. 
. You mean Mrs. Fitchs watch? 
Well, there were two damaged 
jewels in it! 

But to take it off her wrist 
right in the middle of dinner and 
go racing out in search of a jew- 
eler at that time of night   

75 



I got one, didnt I? And he 
saw the cracked one on the top 
and put up a battle when I hold 
him about the chipped one under- 
neath, but he took the watch 
apart and sure enough   

Yes, darling. I know. Thats 
not whats important. 

The elevator door opened and 
they got in. 

Then what is? challenged 
Les. 

She glanced at the elevator 
operator and whispered, What 
you told me after Mr. Fitch said 
they couldnt wait any longer 
for you to get back and to send 
the watch  Les! Youre not 
listening! 

But he was. He was listening 
very hard. 

The poor thing, he said, 
shaking his head sadly. 

She looked around. Except for 
the operator, they were alone in 
the elevator. 

Who? she asked. 

The elevator. When are peo- 
ple going to learn that too much 
oil   

Thats what I mean, darling. 
She guided him across the cor- 
ridor and opened the door to a 
waiting room. Shakily she said. 
Now there isnt a thing to worry 
about. 

Oh, no? he snapped. With 
imbeciles and bunglers torment- 
ing defenseless machines that ask 
nothing more than to be done by 
76 



as they do, living by the Golden 
Rule, which is more than I can 
say   

Mr. Shay? inquired the 
nurse-receptionist at the desk. 
You may go right in. Dr. Hyde 
is expecting you. 

Dr. Hyde, snarled Les. I 
bet hes got a silent partner 
named Mr. Jekyll. 

He flung open the door and 
slammed it shut behind him. 

VYT^ith his hands behind his 
head, Les lay staring up at 
the ceiling, blinking once a min- 
ute. Thalia inchwormed rapidly 
toward him until her head was 
under his chin. 

Darling? she said in a very 
little voice. 

He breathed slightly harder on 
her hair to show he was paying 
attention. 

You know, weve only been 
married three months, she said, 
and already we act as if wed 
grown old and gray together. 

Uh, he told her. 

Well, I dont feel old and 
gray. She paused. Do you? 

Um, he elaborated. 

You just lie there, she cried 
angrily. Dont you give one 
single, solitary thought to how 
 how undesirable it makes me 
feel? 

He forced his throat to move, 
then his tongue, finally his lips. 
Youre not. 



GALAXY 



Then what   She stopped, 
was silent for a long moment. 
Im a heel, she said against his 
chest. Youre trying to digest 
what Dr. Hyde said to you to- 
day. 

Les sat up abruptly with his 
back against the headboard, one 
stiff forefinger stabbing repeated- 
ly at the mattress. Not digest. 
Regurgitate. 

It made sense to me, darling. 
What? That I wanted to kill 
my father for not buying me an 
Erector set? 

Well, didnt you? 

Of course not! And why not 
my mother, too? She had just as 
much to do with me not getting 
it as he did. 

The Oedipal situation. 

And if 1 say she loused me up 
more than Dad ever did, youll 
agree with Hyde that Im dis- 
placing or something. Oh, no. 
Youre not catching me in that 
no-exit trap. Besides, Dad bought 
me a bike right afterward and I 
had a hell of a lot more fun with 
it than Id have gotten out of an 
Erector set. Mom had plenty to 
say about the danger of riding a 
bike in the city, but he trusted 
my judgment and bought one 
just the same. 

Infantilizing you, darling, 
she said gently, instead of help- 
ing you learn to accept inevitable 
frustrations. 

Who was frustrated? he 

INSIDE MAN 



shouted. I loved that bike! And 
not only that, I didnt even think 
once of an Erector set till Dr. 
Peabody suggested 1 take up a 
hobby! He waited. Go ahead, 
say it  I repressed the whole 
thing, didnt I? 

Thats what Dr. Hyde said, 
darling. 

All right, smart guy, see v.?hat 
you make of this. I told him the 
truth, every bit of it, and he says 
hallucinations. So I say oh, yeah, 
what about the water cooler over 
in the corner and he says what 
about the water cooler. And I 
tell him theres a tiny leak in the 
refrigerating coil and he takes 
a look, only the crack is too small 
to see, but in a month or two 
theyll have to seal it up and put 
in more refrigerant, you wait and 
see if they dont. 

And in the meantime? she 
asked. We cant have you go 
around in this nervous state. 

I know, he said miserably. 
The rheostat on the electric 
mixer is calibrated wrong, the 
oil burner is feeding too fast, the 
bulb in the hall is about ready 
to blow, we got a lemon of a 
pre-amp in the hi-fi, the turn- 
table is almost a full rpm too 
slow, and I bet theres going to 
be a pip of a smashup on the 
highway  I dont like the way 
the traffic light feels. 

Feels? 

Yes, he said flatly. Feels. 

77 



Darling? she started again. 

Urn. 

You know youre only person- 
alizing these things the way you 
did when you were so awfully 
disappointed about the Erector 
set. 

Sure, sure. 

Its just a matter of accepting 
that emotionally. 

Im working on it. 

And you dont need your 
mother any more. You have me. 

He rolled out of bed. I never 
thought of that, he said, and 
began unbuttoning his pajama 
top. 

Darling, what have you got 
in mind? she asked, wide-eyed. 

Taking a walk to clear my 
head. You and Hyde have all the 
explanations. Without the two 
of you to confuse me, maybe I 
can find the answers. 

C hiUed and tired, Les wandered 
into Mikes All Nite Garage. 
Mike jMDked his head out from 
under a car on the grease pit and 
asked, Do something for you, 
Mr. Shay? 

No, said Les. You fix them 
instead of ruining them. 

Thats how I make my living, 
Mike said cheerfully. If they 
didnt ruin em, I wouldnt have 
em to fix. 

Les, about to retort in sudden 
rage, sat down on a fender in- 
stead and thought about Mikes 
78 



philosophy. It was as if dentists 
hired thugs to bash in peoples 
teeth so there would always be 
work, or veterinarians poisoned 
animals just enough to need 
treatment. He decided he didnt 
like Mikes reasoning. He also 
decided not to argue about it; 
he was tired of strange looks and 
counter-arguments. 

Mike climbed out of the pit, 
wiped his hands on a ball of dirty 
cotton waste and got into the car 
to start the motor. He cocked his 
head like a music critic listening 
first to one section of the orches- 
tra and then the other. 

Sounds pretty good, he pro- 
nounced. 

The generator, said Les. 

Mike frowned. What about 
the generator? 

Its undercharging. 

Hell it is! 

Hell it isnt. 

Mike glanced at the needle and 
winked. So, okay, more busi- 
ness. Then he scowled at Les. 
Howd you know it was under- 
charging? 

Its a long story. You have 
any more jobs tonight, Mike? 

Nope. Why? 

Youve got a bunch of cars 
on the lot. Ive got ten bucks to 
either prove or disprove some- 
thing. Deal? 

Deal, said Mike, leading the 
way out to the lot. 

By the seventh car, Mike was 
GALAXY 



quiet and thoughtful. Les had 
found only one that murmured 
tranquilly and when he stated 
what was wrong with each, and 
Mike checked, Les had pinpoint- 
ed the trouble exactly. 

Well, how do you account 
for that? Les wanted to know. 

Mike did some meditative 
scratching. I go by ear myself, 
Mr. Shay. I can listen to a motor 
and tell pretty near whats wrong. 
You just got a better ear than 
me, thats all. 

And when it isnt the mo- 
tor? A lot of things in the body 
and chassis didnt squeak or rat- 
tle. 

Yeah, said Mike. I was 
thinking about them. I cant fig- 
ure it out. 

I can, another voice said. 

Les leaped. A solemn face 
with a slight stubble and a greasy 
homburg was leaning out of a 
car window. 

Sorry, Prof, said Mike. I 
didnt mean to wake you. Prof, 
Mr. Shay. I let the Prof sleep 
in the cars, provided he takes his 
shoes off and keeps his hat on. 

My pleasure, Mr. Shay, an- 
nounced the Prof. 

H-hello, said Les. You did 
say you could figure it out? 

No mystery at all, the Prof 
said. Can you do this only with 
automobiles or all kinds of ma- 
chinery? 

All kinds. 

INSIDE MAN 



Then the answer is very sim- 
ple. stated the Prof. Telepa- 
thy. 

'^Telepathy! 

Of a very highly specialized 
variety. The Prof looked hope- 
fully at Les. Is the full explana- 
tion worth the price of a drink? 

Ill say! exclaimed Les. 

^y^halia opened red eyes and 
watched Les pick his way 
across the uncluttered floor to 
the closet. 

Well? she said. Did you find 
your answers? 

Ah  you bet, said Les, 
carefully dropping his clothes to 
the floor. 

In a bottle. 

Over a bottle. With the most 
profound  makes your Dr. 
Hyde sound  listening with the 
third ear when he should be using 
all three! 

Okay, go on, she said re- 
signedly. 

Nothing to it. Im a specia- 
list. 

A specialist? 

He sat down on the bed to 
tangle with his shoelaces. A 
born mechanic. 

Now look here, Lester Shay! 
If you think youre going to give 
up a perfectly good business to 
go rummaging around in cars   

Dont have to, he answered 
peacefully. Just gotta harden 
myself. Thats what the Prof says. 

79 



Hes not really a professor, only 
talks that way because he claims 
it intimidates people. 

A bum! 

No, sweetheart. A different 
kind of specialist. Damn shoe- 
laces! He snapped them and 
kicked his shoes across the room. 
His notion is that evolution al- 
ways starts with simple, general 
types and works up to highly 
specialized ones. 

Like born mechanics! 

He smiled delightedly. Thats 
it. Or born mathematicians. Or 
born laborers. Or born artists, 
salesmen, farmers   

Bums. 

Oh, just the very, very, very, 
good ones, he corrected her 
owlishly. The others work at it, 
but theyre not specialists. Way 
he puts it, the difference is in the 
degree of success. 

And, she said, youre a bom 
mechanic. 

Right, Just never got a chance 
to start. Better this way, though. 
You see, I know what machines 
feel because I feel it, too. If Id 
been doing that all these years, 
Id be nothing but nerves. A lot 
of people dont treat machines 
right, you know. Feeling how the 
machines suffer would put me in 
just as bad shape as they are. 
She sat up interestedly. This 
Prof of yours sounds bright. Did 
he tell you how to get rid of 
your  your   

80 



Affliction, darling. Its like 
when a surgeon goes down the 
street and he sees people in dras- 
tic need of operations and cant 
do anything about it. Couldnt 
club them, haul them away to 
the hospital, operate on them, 
could he? 

No, of course not. 

So he has to steel himself. Or 
take the gardener who feels what 
flowers feel. And grass. Srubbery. 
He has to cut the flowers, mow 
the lawn, clip the hedges. If he 
felt every slash into every bit of 
vegetation, weeds included  
well, you can imagine. 

She thought. Yes, I think I 
can. And what about you, darl- 
ing? 

Same thing. Steel myself. The 
Prof says I cant take care of 
all the machines in the world and 
hes right. So I gotta shut out 
the cries and groans and moans 
of the machinery. You see? 

I see, but can you do it? 
she asked worriedly. 

Diversion does the trick. If I 
receive, I just make sure I re- 
ceive something else. The Prof 
suggested trying people. So I did, 
down at the tavern. 

How did you make out? 
Noisy damned place, he 
said. And full of alcoholic 
thoughts. But I concentrated and 
it blanked out the screeching fan 
and the pump in the cellar that 
needs cleaning so badly   

GALAXY 



Peoples thoughts, said Tha- 
lia uneasily. I dont know if I 
like that. I know I wouldnt feel 
comfortable around you. 

He plumped up the pillow, ac- 
cidentally dropped it on the floor, 
tired to decide whether to pick 
it up, realized he would fall on 
top of it. 

Doesnt work that way at all, 
sweetheart. Its   He hunted 
for an analogy. It comes out 
like machinery. 

Like what? she exclaimed. 
Here, maybe I can show you. 
He stood beside the bed and 
gazed down searchingly at her. 



Mm-fiumm. Your radiator is 
boiling over. 

What a crude way to put it! 

He continued standing there, 
his gaze gone remote and unsee- 
ing. 

Well? Thalia asked ir- 
ritably. Hows your radiator? 

Thats what Im trying to find 
out, he replied in a distant voice. 

And? 

Its percolating a little, he 
answered. 

She threw the covers aside. 
Come on, get in, she said. Its 
better than nothing. 

 H.L. GOLD 



Rare 0!d Periodicals for Your Collection 

A backward time machine: the actual newspapers Americans read a century 
and more ago. This is living history, the eyewitness accounts of great battles, 
the debates of famous figures. Not reproductions or facsimlies but the original 
newspapers themselves, suitable for framing or binding, almost mint condition 
except for sHght age-darkening at the edges, many still uncut, shipped boxed 
and insured, postpaid. No duplicates. First order takes each Item. 

3 issues Boston Patriot; Saturday, Sept. 16, 1809; Sat., June 29, 1810; Wed., Apr. 
4/ 1810. Correspondence of late Pres. Adams. $23.50. 

7 issues Rhode Island American & Providence Gazefie, July, Aug. & Oct. 1828 
(various dates). $46.00. , 

5 issues N. Y. Evening Post, March & July, 1822. $31.50. 

Civil War issues N. Y. Daily Tribune, 1861-1863. 45 issues various dates. Fort 
Sumter doomed, Bombardment of Charlestown, Capture of Chesapeake, etc. 
Single copies $8.50 each (our choice), 3 copies $22.00 (our choice), all 42 copies, 
$215 (if no prior sale). 

6 copies National Gazette (Philadelphia), Apr., Oct. & Dec. 1824, various dates. 
$33.00. 

Send order to 1. Pritchet, 2 Knollwood Rd., Eastchester, N.Y. Payment with order 
or will be sent C.O.D. for $10 deposit. From the collection of Robert M. Guinn. 
Authenticity guaranteed by Galaxy Publishing Corp. 



INSIDE MAN 



81 




Tdc Mficdimf, ^cjfmfC ftuipck 
W/mt 
Wftm 

WtcH ucare? fku 




i(w mm^pnCtafti uptiU lifww, 
^ Uu(fi^Myaeir^fHr^ 
Jin^roi^eifvL 
w ftmtppmrucf(ifvc 

"^mm rnmnuftfeCf 

JmHdtfctis^^ (PHft^efT 
X^idlmmcftvfui, 

Man mtffef tde mr^ imn? 
'TUm lUeff^OUc, 

82 





, vf tnm Qc ^ 

W tde fum pfaCC macft ^s ^ 

'^ifU Hi(in$weai(tei^ftif 
Hifn^edHliia -fprifipf tmcamjylM^mdtinCCj 

(^c fff h^ ^cuL 
^'"'^Tkk pape^ oM(mc(te rcun^/ off ^is sCp pc^ ^ 
^fWHf t(le prec ipice of time tvitd w^ttc. 
ccufeUi ccOi^raiey (Uy ftimintfU^c 
r^diSfc^. ^ 

^(tcH^dt ^Inyfu^tjpcfcu^ e^jnfltdQm^ 
Np ftme^HPty ppmy fwid tde r 

Np ptfippt mtiv^ iftp QmmA^p 

Mftc^imyarc (QcuC^a^ ^m^muyi (Cc, 

Jf idm w MHcd ay yduiy up mCf me^eJ 



83 





fi- 

Sfour 
information 



BY WILLY LEY 

FIFTEEN YEARS OF GALAXY - 
THIRTEEN YEARS OF F.U 

G alaxy Magazine is 15 years 
old with this issue, but my 
column is not, even though I was 
represented in Vol. I. No. 1. It 
was an article on Flying Saucers, 
written at the editors request 
and then considerably shortened 
by the same editor  but I no 
longer recall just what it was he 
snipped out. Flying Saucers were 



84 



a recent (phenomenon) at the 
time, stories about them had 
been in the daily press for about 
three years running. And while 
three years of stories without the 
faintest bit of evidence that 
would be considered as such in 
a court of law made me quite 
doubtful, one could not yet dis- 
miss the whole thing. 

I did not say so in print, but 
I had a nagging feeling that the 
saucers would turn out to be 
something like the case of the 
Washington D.C. hair fetishist 
that occupied space in the Wash- 
ington newspaper at the same 
time when the first flying saucer 
report from Boise, Idaho, made 
the front pages of the same 
newspaper which I read with 
great astonishment while sitting 
in the street car that brought me 
to my laboratory in College 
Park, Maryland, every morning. 
What happened was this: a girl 
turned up at the police station 
(or at the newspaper office. I 
dont know which, since I paid 
no attention to the first report) 
claiming that somebody had cut 
off a heavy strand of her beauti- 
ful blonde hair while she was 
riding one of these self-same 
street cars during the morning 
rush hour. The police had hardly 
started an investigation, when 
another girl told the same story. 
Two days later a third incident 
occurred. I dont know at what 



point the police grew suspicious, 
the newspapers did at about the 
seventh case, when the assailant 
was described as a young blond 
man  but the damage he ha;l 
done was hard to sVe. 

That girl then admitted that 
she only had wanted Co get her 
picture into the newspaper. Then 
the case before her admitted 
deception and so all the way 
back to the first case where the 
loss of hair had been due to an 
accident  with the afterthought 
that it should be exploited in 
some way. 

"VTow, eighteen years after the 

^ first flying saucer report in 
the Washington papers and fif- 
teen years after my article in the 
first issue of Galaxy I see a great 
deal of similarity in the two per- 
formances. 

During the second year of 
Galaxys existence I contributed 
a few scattered articles, one on 
the Loon missile which then 
received a great deal of publicity 
(in retrospect I fail to see why), 
one on the African aardvark and 
one on the meteoric procession 
of February 9, 1913. 

The last one, I admit, was 
written for the purpose of point- 
ing out that there can be very 
strange displays in the sky that 
have perfectly natural causes. Of 
course, neither efficient aircraft 
nor atom bombs existed in 1913, 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



85 



hence people seeing something 
unusual had less reason to be- 
come jittery. 

The first regular column ap- 
peared in the March issue of 1952, 
the idea that I should write a 
regular column, ranging at ran- 
dom over the whole field of 
science, originated with Horace 
L. Gold, the first editor. The 
overall title of the column, I was 
told, was suggested by Theodore 
Sturgeon. Everything else was up 
to me, except that there was a 
rule in the beginning, that my 
column should resemble a news- 
paper column in that it consisted 
of a number of short items. And 
since Galaxy did not carry a reg- 
ular letters to the editor fea- 
ture, the letters containing scien- 
tific questions were shunted to 
me for incorporation in the col- 
umn. As regular readers know, I 
still answer such letters in my 
column if I feel the answer might 
be of general interest; provided, 
of course, that I know the an- 
swer. But answerable letters 
do not come in frequently; the 
majority of the letters I receive 
either ask questions that have no 
answer (e.g. what are quasars) 
or else the answer is not likely 
to be of general interest, as for 
example the title and publication 
date of a book my correspondent 
remembers incompletely. 

But let me backtrack a bit to 
the scientific news events that 



were recent when Galaxy was 
started. There was, of course, the 
atom bomb as it was then call- 
ed, <-he fission bomb as we call it 
now. To people who knew some- 
thing about atomic energy it was 
clear that the fusion or hydrogen 
bomb would follow  its devel- 
opment was then ordered by 
President Truman in January 
1950. 

Two recent astronomical d>s- 
coveries had been made by the 
same American astronomer, Ger- 
ard P. Kuiper. They were the 
fifth moon of Uranus which he 
had named Miranda (1948) and 
the second moon of Neptune 
which he had named Nereid 
(1949). 

'^he active space age was still 
five years in the future when 
Vol. I., No. 1. of Galaxy appear- 
ed on the newsstands. Few 
people knew at the time that 
space had already been reached, 
namely by Bumper No. 5 on Feb- 
ruary 24, 1949. The rocket had 
been the fifth in a series of eight 
two-stage liquid fuel rockets, the 
first stage being an ex-German 
V-2, the upper stage a W AC-Cor- 
poral rocket developed in Cali- 
fornia. The upper stage reached 
a total altitude of 250 miles. It 
cannot be said that actual satel- 
lite plans of any kind existed at 
the time. A few years earlier 
Arthur C. Clarke had suggested 



86 



GALAXY 



the possibility of Extra-terres- 
trial Relays, as he called them, 
in an article in the British Mag- 
azine Wireless World. These re- 
lays were three satellites in the 
24-hour orbit  three syncoms 
as they would now be called. But 
this was mainly a suggestion 
pointing out what might be done 
in the future, it was not a detail- 
ed plan. I am hanpy to report 
that Arthur C. Clarke, after the 
first actual communications satel- 
lites had been put into orbit, re- 
ceived the Gold Medal of the 
Franklin Institute for his sug- 
gestion. 

But the actual satellite plans 
came several years later, around 
19.53. Wernher von Brauns con- 
cept of a wheel-shaped manned 
space station received most of 
the publicity. I devoted two 
columns to the space station con- 
cept (April and May 1953 and 
then again in December 1962). 
It is still a good concept and I 
feel still confident that well build 
a space station of this kind at 
about the time of the first band- 
ing on the moon or soon after- 
wards. The first satellite project 
that was actually carried out, 
though with endless delay and 
countless heartaches, was, of 
course. Project Vanguard, to 
which the column in the Sep- 
tember, 1956 issue was devoted. 

The first astronomical discov- 
ery after Galaxy existed was that 



of the twelfth moon of Jupiter 
(J-XII) by Seth B. Nicholson on 
September 29, 1951, before my 
column existed. But it was re- 
ported in my column in the Au- 
gust issue of 1952. In 1954 he 
eighth moon of Jupiter (J-VIII) 
that had been lost was re- 
discovered with the aid of high- 
speed computers, but I had to 
pass this one up because I did 
not learn about it until about 
a year later. 

All along I had to keep in 
mind that considerable time 
would go by between the writing 
of a column and its appearance 
on the newsstands. Even when 
Galaxy was still on a monthly 
schedule that time interval was 
seven weeks  and seven weeks 
would have required a special 
effort on the part of everybody, 
a twelve week interval was clos- 
er to normal. Hence I was never 
able to pay much attention to 
nev/s for by the time they could 
have appeared in Galaxy every- 
body had read about them. That 
long interval between writing 
and publication caused a few 
other complications too. Once, 
for example. I had prepared a 
piece on new manipulating de- 
vices, steel fingers that could not 
only handle red-hot metal or 
strongly radioactive substances 
but could also perform feats of 
strength simultaneously if their 
operator desired. I had even ob- 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



87 



tained a set of half a dozen pho- 
tographs. But about three days 
before sending the material to 
the editor, Life Magazine devoted 
several of its pages to the same 
device, needless to say with color 
pictures. If I had gone ahead 
with my own piece it would have 
been the coldest of cold hash (or 
at least would have looked that 
way) so I put my photographs 
away for filing and wrote a dif- 
ferent column in a hurry. 

'T^he fact that Galaxy is not a 
weekly  for which I am 
quite grateful, otherwise  also 
saw to it that a few articles never 
got written at all. There was one 
I remember: a nice thorough 

piece on communications satel- 
lites, carefully explaining their 
purpose, the way they worked, 
the orbits they should be in and 
so forth. By the time I had block- 
ed out the piece itself and made 
a few diagrams. Echo I was put 
into orbit and was clearly visible 
to everybody. Now this required 
an additional section on passive 
communications satellites, those 
that only reflect radio waves 
without amplifying them. Natur- 
ally I had to wait for some re- 
sults, nobody was quite sure at 
the moment how the perform- 
ance of the early and naturally 
primitive active communica- 
tions satellites would compare 
with that of the much bigger, 



though passive Echo satellite. 

By the time such results be- 
came known, another active com- 
munications satellite had been 
thrown into orbit. Always keep in 
mind that I could not just wait, 
I still had to produce a column 
per issue and sometimes a sub- 
ject needed two successive col- 
umns. So the article on communi- 
cations satellites languished while 
other columns (equally interest- 
ing, I hope) saw the light of 
day. By the time I looked at my 
folder on this subject again, Tel- 
star I was orbited, got front page 
articles everyplace and a double- 
spread in Life. Then I gave up, 
by now communications satellites 
had become so thoroughly known 
to the public that there was no 
use wasting space in Galaxy on 
them. 

The same story was repeated 
at a somewhat later date with 
masers and lasers. To my knowl- 
edge this is the first time these 
words are mentioned in my col- 
umn, but once they were intend- 
ed to be a column. But the 
maser-laser story exhibited a 
strong kinship to the behavior of 
the mythological Hydra. Cut off 
one head and two new ones will 
grow. This is a gratifying thing 
as far as progress is concerned, 
but it can prevent a man from 
finishing an article he had in 
mind. 

While I could not hope to keep 



88 



GALAXY 



up with a rapidly developing 
story, such as the space age with 
its hundreds of satellites, dozens 
of space probes and multiple 
spurts of development in all pos- 
sible directions, an addition to an 
older discovery is often a fine 
starting point for a survey. This 
is especially the case if the older 
discovery is of the cliff-hanger 
type, of which Latimeria was the 
prime example of the first half 
of the twentieth century. 

A few days before Christmas, 
1938, a very strange fish had 
been brought ashore by a com- 
mercial fishing vessel at the port 
of East London on the east coast 
of South Africa. The fish was 
large-mouthed, bright blue in 
color, about four and a half feet 
long and had strangely shaped, 
very powerful fins. The captain 
of the trawler had never seen 
anything like this and neither had 
Miss M. Courtenay-Latimer, the 
curator of the local museum. She 
wrote to Professor J. L. B. Smith 
at Rhodes University in Gra- 
hamstown. South Africa, who was 
an expert on the marine fishes 
of the area. But there were de- 
lays, when Prof. Smith finally 
got to East London, the internal 
organs of the fish had to be 
thrown out for very natural rea- 
sons  by now Miss Courtenay- 
Latimer would probably be able 
to drop it into a tank of liquid 



nitrogen and keep it, intestinal 
bacteria and all, nearly indefin- 
itely. What was left was enough 
to convince Prof. Smith that a 
most unusual discovery had been 
made. It was one of the fishes 
known to paleontologists as coe- 
lacanth, a group that had been 
believed to be extinct for at least 
50 million years. 

The discovery was exciting for 
more than one reason. It was not 
only a long extinct form, it was 
also unusual in being much larger 
than any coelacanth known. The 
fossils usually measured only 
eight inches in length. A twelve- 
inch coelacanth was a big one 
and one incomplete fossil indi- 
cated an over-all length of twen- 
ty inches. The living version was 
fifty-five inches long, which had 
been the main reason why Prof. 
Smith had been doubtful about 
the sketch that had been enclos- 
ed in the letter he had received 
from Miss Courtenay-Latimer. 
The shape had suggested coela- 
canth and nothing else, but the 
measurements had spoken against 
that conclusion. (After the Sec- 
ond World War was over, a 
sixty-inch fossil coelacanth came 
to light in West Germany.) 

Professor Smith named the 
fish Latimeria chalumnae, the 
species name was derived from 
the name of the river that emp- 
ties into the ocean at East Lon- 
don. Naturally he wanted a fresh 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



89 



specimen. But he ran into two 
kinds of trouble. The first one 
was that the Second World War 
was underway and most people 
had other worries than supposed- 
ly extinct fishes, no matter how 
rare and how important to 
science. The second was that 
Smith had distributed his thou- 
sands of leaflets with a picture 
of the fish, a description and an 
offer of reward, in the wrong 
area. It so happens that the first 
specimen caught had strayed 
southward from its normal habi- 
tat by about 1,800 miles. Nor- 
mally it can be found around the 
Comores Islands and the second 
specimen was found there, again 
just before Christmas, in 1952. 

Now, that the normal habitat 
was known, the waiting time 
shrank; the third specimen was 
caught in September 1953 and 
the fourth in January 1954. Since 
the Comore Islands are French, 
French scientists took over and 
published preliminary reports on 
their observations and then a 
reasonably comprehensive popu- 
lar report became possible. It ap- 
peared in the May, 1956, issue of 
Galaxy. 

'"T^he year 1954 did not only 
bring additional information 
on the fish Latimeria, it also solv- 
ed, in a rather unexpected man- 
ner, an older puzzle. During the 
years from 1908 to 1915 fossil 



bones had been found in southern 
England, near a place called Pilt- 
down. In the end they produced 
a human skull, hailed as one of 
the earliest inhabitants of Eng- 
land named Eoanthropus daw- 
sonii, or Dawsons Dawn Man. 

In 1954 British paleontologists 
proved conclusively that the 
Dawn Man had been a hoax. The 
upper part of the skull actually 
was human and even fossil, but 
not particularly old. Now, that it 
is known what it is one may say 
of it that it does not present 
either a puzzle nor an insight. 
The lower jaw was the hoax, it 
was the jaw of an ape, almost 
certainly of an Orang-Utan. The 
whole jaw had been made to look 
and feel fossil with considerable 
skill and especially the teeth had 
been filed and otherwise treated 
to lose their pronounced apish 
character and to look like the 
worn teeth of a primitive human. 

It must have been the work of 
many months to accomplish this 
and one can only wonder why 
some people devote so much 
work and so much skill to such 
agob. If a painter spends a year 
painting a lost old master and 
another year in aging the 
painting so that he can sell it at 
a high price his behavior is un- 
-ethical, despicable and criminal; 
but one can at least see the rea- 
son! But whoever changed the 
Orang-Utan jaw around neither 



90 



GALAXY 



reaped reward nor questionable 
fame. 

Of course it had been just the 
combination of a fairly modern 
skulltop and a most primitive- 
looking lower jaw which had 
made Piltdown man such a scien- 
tific puzzle. As soon as the fact 
that it was a forgery had been 
published, I started reading up 
on everything that had been writ- 
ten about Piltdown man while it 
was believed to be genuine. 

I could do most of this read- 
ing at home because my library 
is full of books on paleontology; 
a recent count revealed that I 
own more books on paleontology 
than on rockets, missiles and 
space travel  due. no doubt, to 
the fact that paleontologists have 
been around for a much longer 
time than space scientists and 
had more time to write. At any 
event, the results were surpris- 
ing. The French authors I con- 
sulted usually made short shift 
of Piltdown man, just mention- 
ing the characteristics and end- 
ing up with: more investigation 
is necessary. In retrospect this 
almost sounds as if they were 
suspicious, but they probably 
were just puzzled. An Austrian 
expert. Prof. Othenio Abel, de- 
voted a great deal of space to 
Piltdown man, but ended up 
with precisely the same sentence, 
though in another language. 
British authors tried hard to fit 



Piltdown man in with other fossil 
humans and pre-humans, hut 
naturally without any good re- 
sult. German authors did the 
same and one or two of them 
voiced a suspicion. It was not 
the suspicion of forgery (nobody 
thought of that) but possibly it 
was a fossil ohne Beweiskraft, a 
fossil that did not prove anything. 
What they did was to ponder 
the possibility that Piltdown 
man, when alive, had not been 
typical of its tribe but had been 
a freak. 

If one started with the lower 
jaw one should expect a some- 
what smaller skullcap of differ- 
ent built. But possiblv just this 
individual had an abnormally 
large (for its type) skull. This 
did not necessarily make him a 
genius: even now a moron oc- 
casionally has an extra large 
brain, a brain that is voluminous 
'but fails to function properly Or 
else, beginning with the skull and 
considering the skull as normal 
for its type, we had the bad luck 
to find the remains of an indi- 
vidual with a lower jaw that was 
a throwback to a much earlier 
type. Maybe, if the whole skele- 
ton were known, some other de- 
formities would be found. 

The write-ups of Piltdown man 
showed an extraordinary expen- 
diture of words like perhaps, 
possibly, if one assumes, and 
so forth  quite naturally be- 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



91 



cause the fossil in question was 
not genuine, as finally proved by 
the two British experts. But Pilt- 
down man never had a column 
devoted to him and I no longer 
remember why not. I had all of 
the material available, most of 
it even at home. I can only con- 
clude that something else which 
I considered to be of more in- 
terest to my readers got in the 
way at the time. Or possibly I 
felt that it had been sufficiently 
covered elsewhere  people who 
do articles for science-fiction 
magazines are always aware that 
their readers read many other 
journals too. 

\ nybody who sits back think- 
ing about the scientific dis- 
coveries of the last fifteen years 
is likely to fall into the trap of 
believing that most of them were 
due to the space effort. True, 
the space effort is responsible for 
a number of them, among them 
things nobody expected to find, 
but this fifteen year period also 
produced great strides elsewhere. 
Not even all the astronomical 
discoveries are due to the space 
effort. 

Very early in 1956  and the 
active space age began late in 
1957 if a reminder of the date 
should be necessary  Dr. Ger- 
ard P. Kuiper pointed out that 
the unusual orbit of Pluto could 
best be explained by assuming 



that Pluto is a run-away moon 
of Neptune. (The same sugges- 
tion had been made in 1936 by 
R. R. Lyttleton in England but 
had failed to attract much atten- 
tion.) This was an item I ex- 
pected to remain confined to as- 
tronomical journals, hence it was 
written up in the column for the 
August 1956 issue. 

Another astronomical discov- 
ery was made in the process of 
being accomplished at the same 
time by the discoverer of Pluto, 
Dr. Clyde W. Tombaugh. But 
this one was connected with the 
space age. That there would be 
artificial satellites soon, and prob- 
ably both Russian and American, 
was certain in 1955. Of course 
they would have to be tracked 
and one man even assumed that 
our military men intended to 
track the Russian satellites some- 
what more carefully than our 
own. But there was a possible 
problem, hadnt there been a 
number of reports, never con- 
firmed to be sure, about small 
satellites of earth? If they really 
existed they would confuse the 
trackers. The thing to do was to 
establish the orbits of such minor 
satellites, if they existed. 

Clyde W. Tombaugh proposed 
a method for such a search and 
designed the necessary instru- 
mentation which was not only 
small enough to be carried on a 
truck, but sensitive enough (in 



92 



GALAXY 



a phrase that was to become 
famous) to detect a white ten- 
nis ball in orbit a hundred miles 
from the surface, and a V-2 
rocket, if painted white, at the 
distance of the moon. In 1957 
his report was out, and I could 
tell of the results of the search 
in my column for the July, 1957, 
issue. The result had been nega- 
tive, there were no minor satel- 
lites of earth so that anything 
that could be detected and track- 
ed had to be artificial. 

Two other astronomical dis- 
coveries also have no direct con- 
nection with the space age. One 
is the diseovery of the mysterious 
quasi-stellar objects, something 
that was quickly shortened to 
quasars without improving our 
understanding of them. The dis- 
covery of the quasars was the 
result of radio astronomy. And 
the most recent discovery, an- 
nounced only four days prior to 
my writing this, is the result of 
using radar techniques. It is the 
discovery that planet Mercury 
does not have a period of rota- 
tion of 88 days, as Giovanni Vir- 
ginio Schiaparelli had announced 
in 1889. The orbital period is 88 
days and Schiaparellis announce- 
ment therefore meant that Mer- 
cury always points the same 
hemisphere toward the earth. The 
outcome of Schiaparellis an- 
nouncement had been several 
fascinating concepts: the scorch- 



ed brightside with puddles of 
molten lead and tin, the perma- 
nently frozen darkside where 
the remains of the former atmo- 
sphere of the planet lay frozen 
on the ground and, last but not 
least, the interesting twilight 
belt where the sun appeared 
above the horizon for a few days 
every 88 days. 

XTow it is known that Mercury 
^ rotates a little faster than 
once every 88 days, the preli- 
minary figure is 65 days. But 
that means that the sun shines 
on every part of Mercurys sur- 
face for a fairly long time. No 
more permanently nearly red-hot 
brightside, no more permanently 
frozen darkside. And no more 
twilight belt. Mercury is still a 
most inhospitable planet, but it 
has lost the distinctive features 
we thought were there. 

Of course some of the major 
discoveries are the outcome of 
putting instruments into space. 
The first big discovery was that 
of the inner Van Allen belt in 
1958, accomplished by Explorer I, 
the first American artificial satel- 
lite which, incidentally, is still in 
orbit. Later the outer Van Allen 
belt was found by another space 
device. Then we have the first 
determination of the thickness of 
the cloud layer of Venus, its in- 
credible height above the surface 
of Venus and the measurement 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



93 



of the very high surface temper- 
ature of the planet, all carried 
out by Mariner II. We have the 
very sharp and detailed photo- 
graphic close-ups of the surface 
of the moon, produced by Ran- 
gers VII, VIII and IX. And by 
the time you read this we may 
have some nice close-up photo- 
graphs of Mars, transmitted over 
more than sixty million miles of 
space by Mariner IV. 

Some of the very important 
discoveries other than space can 
only be mentioned here: increas- 
ed (though still fragmentary) 
understanding of the inner struc- 
ture of the atom; vastly increas- 
ed understanding (not yet quite 
complete) of the basic mechan- 
ism of life and especially of here- 
dity; and the interesting and 
completely unexpected discovery 
that at least the heaviest ones of 
the so-called noble gases, namely 
xenon and krypton, will form 
chemical compounds, in spite of 



what every chemical handbook 
has said for the last half century. 

But many of the mysteries 
that were written up at one time 
or another in my column, are 
still mysteries. Of the clouds of 
Venus, we now know the extent, 
but we still dont know their 
chemical composition, though the 
top layer seems to consist of ice 
crystals. The Red Spot of Jupiter 
is still unexplained, the Gegen- 
schein is still a mystery in spite 
of (or rather because of) four 
different explanations. We still 
dont know when and how ball 
lightning will form. And the large 
rotating luminous wheels of the 
Indian Ocean certainly need 
more investigation. And I refuse 
to think about quasars until more 
is known.  

I suspect, however, that the 
majority of these mysteries will 
have been explained, not another 
fifteen years from now but in 
about five years.  WILLY LEY 



At last! Retief's first full-length novell 

RETIEFS WAR 

by Keith Laumer 

The galaxy's farthest-out diplomat takes on the wildest planet of all! 

AN OUNCE OF EMOTION by Gordon R. Dickson 
ORIGIN OF SPECIES by Robert F. Young 

These cHid many others in the October If  get your copy fodayl 

94 GALAXY 



A 

Better Mousehole 

by EDGAR PANGBORN 



Trouble with those blue bugs 
was they didn't hurt you . 
they did something far worse/ 



S o now Irma will be at me to 
do something about them 
blue bugs. I got to do something 
about Irma. 

Dr. West is wise too, as good as 
said so when him and Judge Van 
Anda was in today for a couple 
beers. Pity Dr. West is not the 
doctoring type doctor but just 
has letters and stuff. Sort of ex- 
plorer people say, account of his 
Independent Income, gone for 
months till the towns forgot him 
and then he turns up full of what 
the buU was done with. 

I dont think the Judge knows 
about the blue bugs. If they bit 
him like they done me hed never 
go to dreaming, not him up there. 



six feet five, (looking back at 
what he thinks the world used to 
be. Still if you was old like him, 
you might want big dreams more 
than ever, about being young. 

If you could te/I them bugs, if 
you could name your own dream! 
No way, I guess. I take the 
dreams I can get. 

Dr. West certainly knows 
something. Id no sooner drawed 
them beers when he starts men- 
tioning mice. I told him, Look, I 
said, you do not see the Health 
Department climbing all over my 
back the way they would if I had 
mice. He asks me, so what is that 
hole in the floor below tlie liquor 
shelves? I had to make like hunt- 



95 



ing for it, and act surprised. 
Knothole, I says. Oh, knothole, 
he says, knothole the regal twin- 
cushioned back of my lap, how 
come a knothole in linoleum? So 
I had to say it could be mice. 
Judge Van Anda says Ha. 

I went down the bar to pass the 
time with Lulu who doesnt 
get much business in the after- 
noon because the light is too 
strong. Lulu is like blonde this 
week. If only I could tell the 
bugs to put Lulu into a dream 
with me! The only time they 
done it she turned into Irma. I 
cant figure that. 

What if Lulu got bit and had 
some dreams herself? 

I suppose Irma thinks I mar- 
ried her so I cant do nothing 
without she comes clomping in 
onto it? If shes solid gold why 
dont she move to Fort Knox? 

I had not hardly started talk- 
ing to Lulu when Dr. West goes 
to booming. Desolation, he says, 
do you think you know what 
desolation is? Its the sub-Arctic 
tundra, he says, and me alone 
in that borrowed Cessna that 
mightve got its engine tuned 
three or four months earlier, and 
no reason to be there except my 
itch to see more of the poor 
wonderful planet before they 
blow it up. Lulu, what do you 
think? What do you say desola- 
tion is? 



Oh, she says, maybe the Sta- 
dium, game over, crowd gone and 
you know, empty popcorn bags 
and match cards and spit. 

You, Al? he says to me. Whats 
desolation? 

I said, oh, maybe a dark night 
and nobody shows you where to 
go. I believe Dr. West is sad in 
his heart in spite of that educa- 
tion which is over my head. It 
would be like him to take off in a 
borrowed plane for the flat side of 
nowhere. * I like to watch him 
standing by Judge Van Anda 
who he is always telling siddown 
siddown and the Judge merely 
says Ha. I can feel sad without 
no Independent Income. I am 42 
and I have this ulcer. 

The tundra, says Dr. West  
a nothing of dun colors, rotting 
snow, and you wonder when the 
whole earth will look like that. 

No! says Lulu about to cry. 
Dont talk thataway! 

Never mind, chicken, he says, 
I was just bleating. 

S uppose you took Irma to this 
here Tundra and told her to 
walk home. Flies, she says last 
night, flies all over you and you 
drunk as a pig. God, I pretty near 
shut her up for good. But she just 
dont know no better. She dont 
have too much of a life with a 
busted-down hack like me that 
couldnt even last five rounds 
with Willie Donohue. 



96 



GALAXY 



Dr. West went on about bor- 
rowing a plane from a friend has 
got this lodge in the north woods, 
and flying over the tundra till he 
saw like a blue spark down there. 
Landed and picked up the ob- 
ject, size and shape of a basket- 
ball he said, not really blue, more 
like daylight split and turned a 
million ways. It hummed when 
he held it to his ear. Thats when 
he broke off to ask me is there a 
basement under this part of the 
bar. 

He knows damn well its got no 
basement. He was in town when 
I got this addition added on. Al- 
ready a cellar under the main 
part, I didnt need another, got 
this part done with merely the 
footing and concrete under the 
lino, I mean if there is any exca- 
vation in forty miles Dr. West 
will be there watching. Its the 
people with an Independent In- 
come or them with not any that 
get the excavation watched. Guys 
like me that work for a living, we 
are up that creek with a little bity 
plastic spoon and no breeze. 
Alls I said was Hell no, this 
here is an addition was added on, 
its got no basement. 

Unless somebody walled it off 
on you, says Judge Van Anda. 
You wont find a better way to 
dispose of a body, the Judge 
says, thats if you have time and 
materials and dont mind the 
labor. Well, the Judge is retired 



after forty years on what they 
call the bench, and keeps saying 
with his experience he ought to 
write detective stories. Yes sir, he 
says, if the walling off has been 
done right, proper pains taken, 
you can give the whole thing a 
very attractive finish. I guess he 
meant the wall. You never know, 
with the Judge. I must of said 
to him a hundred times. Look, 
Ive said, the surprising type 
things that have happened to me, 
you ought to put them into a 
book if youre going to write one. 
He just goes hrrm hrrm and Ha. 

I hated him sounding off about 
bodies that way, account of Lu- 
lus nerves. Before Dr. West be- 
gun his story Lulu was talking 
to me about that murderer over 
to Lincolnsville, the one that 
done in his whole family with a 
kitchen knife, and the shooting 
down in Jonesburg a couple 
weeks ago. She was real nerved 
up. His whole family, and with a 
plain kitchen knife. When the 
cops come for him  Jesus, he 
was like asleep, it said. Lulu takes 
the news pretty personal, its the 
woman of it. 

T^r. Wests little blue eyes  
why, damn, theyre near 
the same color as my bugs, like 
sky with the sun caught in it. 

Maybe the bugs are something 
new to science that Dr. West has 
to keep top secret? Then this 



A BETTER MOUSEHOLE 



97 



tundra story would be the edu- 
cated crappola hes obliged to 
shovel over it? His eyes are 
bloodshot like mine have been 
getting the last few weeks. I been 
losing weight too and it aint my 
ulcer. The blood the bugs take 
out couldnt make no such differ- 
ence, and them so gentle  I 
float off into the dreams almost 
as soon as they come settle on 
me. 

Id give anything to have an- 
other dream where Irma is like 
when we got married, not bony 
and mean but soft, brown hair 
with all them goldy lights, voice 
like country cream. 

When Dr. West quit talking 
Lulu was crying. She says she 
feels sometimes like everything 
was on top of her, usually goes 
to the Ladies and comes back 
with a rebuilt mouth and a fresh 
bounce to her. Lulu could put 
her shoes in my trunk any time. 
She aint had a real happy life. 

Aw, who does? For young peo- 
ple its always a maybe-tomor- 
row, for the rest, its where-did- 
everything-go? The Judge, he 
should be happy looking across 
all them years of playing God 
and sticking people in jail? Dr. 
West never married, chases 
moonblink over the world with 
his Independent Income, but 
once he told me what he honestly 
craved was hearth and home, nice 
woman to warm his slippers and 



his bed, only a devil in him 
couldnt ever let him rest. And 
I have this ulcer. 

The Bible or somebody says if 
you build a better mousetrap 
theyll like put you on teevy. 
Alls I got is a better mousehole. 
What do they give you for that? 

Dr. West waited till Lulu come 
back from the Ladies to go on 
with his story. He wasnt telling 
it for her, though, spite of her 
coming to sit on the stool by him 
and give him a feel or two for 
friendships sake. Not for the 
Judge neither. It was for me and 
that hole in the floor. I could 
of told him they never come out 
till I close the bar and dim the 
lights. 

He said he smuggled the blue 
ball home, not a word to anyone. 
As a story it wasnt nothing, 
which is one reason I cant be- 
lieve he was making it up. He 
kept calling the thing a sphere. I 
always thought a sphere was 
some type musical instrument. 

"I l^hen he says home he means 
^  the ram-and-shackle man- 
sion at the edge of town with 
back land running up Ragged 
Rock Hill and Johnny Blood rat- 
tling around in the mansion being 
caretaker with one eye that used 
to be an actor and still lets go 
with some Shakespeare if any- 
thing startles him. He said he 
sent Johnny away for two 



98 



GALAXY 



months vacation to this sister 
in Maine who has been trying 
to make Johnny come to Jesus 
anyhow thirty-forty years, only 
when Johnny hears that special 
tone of voice he shuts the good 
eye and lets go with something 
from this Shakespeare. 

I wish I had the education to 
make with Shakespeare when 
Irma is at me about talking to 
Lulu or drinking up the profits 
which I never could do with this 
ulcer unless I would drop dead, 
she never thinks of that, or why 
dont I at least try to earn 
enough we would spend winters 
in Florida if I had any zing. 

Sent Johnny away, he says, 
and kept the sphere at room tem- 
perature. Dr. West is always 
talking thataway. A room dont 
run a temperature, or if he 
means hot like some room whats 
so scientific if somebody mon- 
keys with the thermostack or 
leaves the God-damn door open? 

Winter in Florida for Christs 
sake. 

The blue thing hatched one 
night after hed gone to bed  
except he says it was not an 
egg but a figure of speech. He 
found the two halves in the 
morning not chipped like a hatch- 
ed egg, just separated, like theyd 
been fitted together originally so 
good you couldnt find the joint. 
Nothing else disturbed, but a hole 
in the window-screen that look- 



ed like it was melted through, 
the ends of copper wire fused 
so the hole looked like a grom- 
met. 

Judge Van Anda asked him 
did he keep the busted eggshell. 
Dr. West says. Now I did try to 
make it plain it was not an egg, 
nor do I know why I waste my 
experiences on you, like when I 
showed that comb my mermaid 
gave me it could of been a paper 
clip, all the impression it made. 
So it could, says the Judge kind 
of brisk, seeing they make such 
combs in Bridgeport and you can 
buy them in any drugstore for 
upwards of nineteen cents plus 
tax. All right, says Dr. West, so 
if she did happen on it in the 
billows off Bridgeport, God damn 
it, she gave it to me, didnt she? 
Oh, dont get red-eyed about it, 
says Judge Van Anda. 

I m not, says Dr. West. Als the 
one with bloodshot eyes, late 
hours likely. He was watching 
me real sharp. No sir, you too, 
Sid, says the Judge, you look in 
the mirror youll see youre red- 
eyed like a weasel, I snow you 
not. Now if you could have 
brought home just one mermaid 
scale. And Dr. West says they do 
not have scales, no more reason 
to have scales than a seal or a 
whale or any other ocean-dwell- 
ing mammal. Ocean-dwelling 
mahooha, says Judge Van Anda. 



A BETTER MOUSEHOLE 



99 



And I suppose, says Dr. West, 
back there ninety-six years ago 
in the little red schoolhouse the 
only biology you ever learned 
was out in the bushes during re- 
cess. Which was a friendly re- 
mark because the Judge could 
go hrrm reminding himself how 
he wants you to think he used 
to be. All the same I quick took 
them another round of beers. 

Lulu says, You got out of that 
too easy. Doc. I remember she 
pushed her shoulders back show- 
ing what she has got. She could 
put her shoes in my trunk any 
time. She says, Do you still have 
the eggshell or do you dont? 

I do not, says Dr. West. I do 
not still possess the two halves 
of that vehicle. 

Well excuse me for living, says 
Lulu, but she wasnt mad. She 
likes everybody, you could call 
it a weakness. 

And why dont you? says the 
Judge. As if I didnt know. 

Because, says Dr. West, I car- 
ried them outdoors to see them 
in the sun, was disturbed by the 
telephone, set them down in a 
thicket, answered the phone, at 
which you bent my ear for a 
half-hour about a detective story 
you plan to start writing any 
day. When I got back the two 
halves were gone. 

Naturally, says the Judge. Na- 
turally. 

Gone, says Dr. West, from a 



patch of soft earth in the thicket 
that showed no footprints. 

We left it at that. Ever since, 
I been thinking about it. Only 
minutes now till closing time or 
I would flip my lid. 

Dr. West was not lying or he 
would of done a mermaid story. 
That dont mean it was the whole 
truth. How could anybody ever 
tell that like they say in the 
law courts? Maybe the bugs bit 
him before they went off through 
the hole in the screen? One bite 
would be enough to show him 
what it does to you. Could we 
sort of share them? 

I would like that. Somethings 
gentled me down lately. I got 
no jealousy about him and Lulu 
going off together like they done 
this afternoon. I dont seem to 
have no angry feelings of no 
kind except about drowning Irma 
in the bathtub if it was practi- 
cal. Aw, I guess I mean I might 
make that type joke, a man 
couldnt do no such thing. Be- 
sides it could be my fault Irma 
is like she is. How about that, 
Al? 

Anyhow Id sooner Lulu went 
off with Dr. West than with say 
this salesman looks like a shaved 
pig and wants a beer. 

Beer. Why cant they ask for 
something unusual just once so I 
would have to think about it 
and stop thinking? 



100 



GALAXY 



Five minutes still to closing. 

It was last night Irma found 
me with my bugs and called 
them flies. I bet she believes 
that. It was the finest part of my 
dream  gone, clobbered, and 
heres Irma in her nightgown 
come down and turned on the 
light, standing there all bones 
and bad temper saying Drunk as 
a pig, now I see where the profits 
go, all down your gut. Her that 
used to talk like a lady, and had 
them goldy lights in her hair. 
Flies, she says, flies everywhere. 

She dont know about the hole, 
my better mousehole, or she 
would of poured cleaning fluid 
down it, and they would of come 
out and fixed her little red wag- 
on. I would not like that to hap- 
pen. Its funny how gentle I feel 
nowadays. I used to be what they 
call a Ruffed Diamond. 

I guess Irma will have took 
her twenty-year grouch to bed 
bv now. Oh no, it wasnt like that 
all of them twenty years, not by 
no means  but my Jesus, Im 
sunnosed to be some damn God- 
nlmighty Apollo Valentino Rock- 
efeller or Im no good? Im good 
in them dreams. I been seven 
feet tall and bronzy, ready when- 
ever T said so. 

There they go again about that 
thing in Tonesburg where the 
lady shot up a radio-teevy store 
account she claimed the noise 
spoiled her dreams. Look  



things like that  it cant mean 
these bugs are  

I wont have a dream tonight 
though. I wont, till I can get a 
real talk with Dr. West. Well, 
speak of the  

ft has come to be morning, hot 
and quiet outside in that gold- 
en street. I better try to think 
through what happened, and 
what Dr. West said. 

When he come in at closing 
time I seen he wanted talk same 
as me. I told him stick around, I 
closed up, doused the front 
lights, we carried a Jameson into 
the back room. He flung down a 
shot and said, I took Lulu up 
to my place. The Judge too. 
Johnny Bloodll be gone another 
couple weeks, but I suppose may- 
be the Judgell be missed. 
Missed? I says. 

He says, Dont be like that, ,A1. 
The Judge is asleep and dream- 
ing, Lulu is asleep and dream- 
ing, and dont you go acting sur- 
prised on me, because I come 
back to talk to you. Beat-up 
crocks like you and me, Al, he 
says, were into middle age, we 
can wait a mite longer for our 
dreams, seeing weve spent morn 
half a lifetime doing not much 
else. 

While I poured him another 
he said, it was Lulu brought 
them back to me. I asked him 
how come. 



A BETTER MOUSEHOLE 



101 



She didnt do anything, he 
says, shes just overweight with a 
big blood pressure. They like 
that. They must need the blood, 
maybe to help them breed. Only 
a couple dozen came out of that 
sphere, but now they might have 
several colonies. I wasnt quite 
truthful, he says  I saw them 
come out, and a few of them 
flew around me with things in 
the fifth pair of limbs that look- 
ed like weapons. While I held 
still because of that, one of them 
bit me and I dreamed a journey 
to Alpha Centauri. 

Maybe, he says, they always 
do it merely to hold us quiet so 
they can drink. Maybe its from 
lovingkindness. 

I asked if it was true what 
hed told us about the halves of 
the shell disappearing. Yes, he 
said, and he said that afterward 
he went searching and grieving 
all over till one night he caught 
a bluish gleam up on Ragged 
Rock Hill. He went to it, work- 
ing his way through the trees 
with a flashlight to where he 
thought it had showed, and set- 
tled down to wait. Sure enough 
they came and gave him a 
dream. It breaks his heart too, 
the way a man cant name his 
own. 

''T^hey come for Lulu. AU we 
did, he says, we turned off 
the lights and set by the open 

102 



window. Coming for Lulu be- 
cause shes right for them, they 
took care of the Judge too, and 
me. My dream was a short one, 
Al. I dont have much blood in 
me. 

He put down another Jame- 
son while I told him what I been 
going through. He stepped over 
to one of the other back-room 
booths to pick something off the 
floor. Hes a noticing restless 
man. Just a buckle like a gold 
rosebud off of a girls shoe. The 
back room gets lively Saturday 
nights, and I aint been sweeping 
up too good, last couple-three 
weeks. Only light I turned on for 
us was the 25-watt bulb in our 
booth with the pink shade  Irma 
chose them shades. Theyre real 
nice. You wont find no God- 
damn interior desecrator thats 
got taste like hers. Dr. West set 
there playing with that gold rose- 
bud and going slow on his Jame- 
son while I talked. 

And I asked him, where do 
they come from? 

Oh, he says, outer space, where 
else? He was turning the buckle 
in and out of the light, reflecting 
a glow into the drink itself, a 
kind of glory. And he says, or 
else inner space. 

I asked him did he think the 
bugs had anything to do with 
them killings. He just wiggled his 
shoulders. 

Thats when I said. Look, 
GALAXY 



couldnt my Irma have a dream? 
He give me no answer. I says, 
maybe it would change how she 
acts and feels about some things? 

Maybe, he says. We dont 
know, he says, we dont know 
much of anything. More we 
know, better we get at asking 
questions we cant answer. Then 
he poured himself another Jame- 
son and after a while I went up- 
stairs. 

Irma wasnt asleep. When I 
touched her shoulder she says, 
God give me patience! and 
flounces clear acrost the bed. I 
says, Irma, honey, I aint after 
you thataway, I just want you 
should come down talk some- 
thing over with I and Doc West. 
West? she says. That dirty old 
man? What for? 

I says, Irma, this is special, 
you give me lip Im big enough 
to make you. You get up and 
fling some clothes on and you 
take that God-damn cold cream 
off your face and come down. 
Alls we want is have a couple 
drinks, talk something over. 

V^e//, she says, arent we the 
^ ^ lord and master all of a 
sudden! You goddam right, I 
says, and get going. I didnt say 
that mean, nor she didnt take it 
mean, just wiped the guck off her 
face as meek as anything, put 
on slippers, and a bathrobe over 
her p-js, and come along. In the 



light of the upstairs hall I seen 
some of them goldy lights, I 
know I did. 

Dr. West had laid his head on 
his arms. Small he was, and 
clean as a dry stick, I dont know 
why she would call him a dirty 
old man. He hadnt finished his 
Jameson. I thought he was hav- 
ing a dream, for the bugs had 
eome, but he looked up and said, 
I brought it on us, I brought it 
on the world. I and some other 
billions, he said. I dont under- 
stand what he meant by that. 

Irma seen the bugs and she 
screamed. Only five-six of them, 
nothing scary. I put my arms 
around her to gentle her. Irma, 
I says, all they do is give you 
beautiful dreams. I want you 
should have some like Ive had. 
Let em bite a little, it dont 
hurt. But she screamed and tried 
to fight me off. She said, I dont 
want to, I just want  I just 
want  

I didnt listen. So hell-bent 
she should have dreams like 
mine, I didnt listen. The way 
she was perking around, the p-js 
got twisted away from her little 
breasts, and I just hung on, too 
lame-brain dumb for anything 
else. Them little things is like 
when she was a girl, I used to 
kid her about what would the 
babies eat, only we never could 
have any. One bug lit there, and 
I just held her  why, them bites 



A BETTER MOUSEHOLE 



103 



dont hurt, I got a hundred onto 
me, they dont even itch. 

She didnt scream again. I felt 
a shock go through her and she 
said. Oh, oh, oh, a kind of cry- 
ing like what I used to hear in 
bed, and her with a voice like 
country cream. The bug flew off. 
I found her mouth and kissed 
her. Her face sagged away from 
me and she was dead. 

I think Dr. West said, your 
little lady, shes asleep? 

I carried her over to this 
lounge chair, sat here with her. 
I dont know what to do. I re- 
member Dr. West, he come over 
and stood by us, though I want- 
ed him to go away. I know I said 
something about maybe some 
people just couldnt have such 
dreams. 

T T e says, maybe its that, or 
maybe she dreamed more 
than us, Al. Maybe this thing 
gave her too big a dream for her 
to stand. Dreamings a dangerous 
thing, he said, its got a dark 
side. If the bugs shoot in some- 
thing that makes the dreaming 
part of us blaze up, the way the 
rest of us cant take it  

I told him I wasnt going to 
try to understand it no more. I 
said I ought to knowed you cant 
make another person have a 



dream. Its not right, its not 
right some-way. 

Dr. West said more, I cant 
just bring it back. I think he said, 
dreamings not a sickness but its 
like one, partly. It made the 
world what it is, different from 
ancient days, and it could un- 
make it. 

I asked him not to notify no 
one, just go away and leave us 
be. 

People will figure the bar is 
closed, theyll give us a bit of 
time before they start crowding 
in. 

And there was something he 
said about how things might even 
get better with the bugs taking 
over, if thats what they meant 
to do. I told him I didnt care 
much about the world, alls I 
ever wanted was to have a de- 
cent life with work I knowed how 
to do and a nice woman and 
maybe some kids. I guess thats 
when Dr. West went away. Hes 
just a lonesome little guy trying 
to figure things out, I shouldnt 
of spoke harsh. 

See, it wasnt like I was trying 
to make you have my dream. 

You look like you was dream- 
ing. You look real sweet, I meant 
to tell you. I dont know why I 
couldnt ever tell you. 

EDGAR PANGBORN 



     



T04 



GALAXY 



THREE TO 
A GIVEN STAR 

by CORDWAINER SMITH 

Illustrated by MORROW 



They were the outcasts of Earth, 
and Earth had given them a destiny 
that fitted their terrible crimes I 



I 

CCCtick your left arm straight 
^ forward, Samm, said 
Folly. 

He stretched his arm out. 

I can sense it! cried Folly. 
Now wiggle your fingers! 
Samm wiggled them. 

Finstemis said nothing, but 

105 



both of them caught from his 
mind, riding clear and wise be- 
side them, a sense of the situa- 
tion. His sense of the situa- 
tion could be summed up in the 
one-word comment, which he did 
not need to utter; 

Foolishness! 

It is not foolishness, Finster- 
nis, cried Folly. Here are the 



threv! ot us, riding empty space 
millions of kilometers from no- 
where. We are people once, Earth 
people from Old Earth Itself. Is 
it foolish to remember what we 
used to be? I was a woman once. 
A beautiful woman. Now Im this 
 this thing, bent on a mission of 
murder and destruction. I used to 
have hands myself, real hands. 
Is it wrong for me to enjoy look- 
ing at Samms hands now and 
then? To think of the past which 
all three of us have left behind. 
Finsternis did not answer; his 
mind was blank to both of them. 
There was nothing but space 
around them, not even much 
space dust, and the bluish light 
of Linschoten XV straight ahead. 
From the third planet of that 
star they could occasionally hear 
the cackle and gabble of the 
man-eaters. 

Once again Folly cried to Fin- 
sternis, Is that so wrong, that I 
should enjoy looking at a hand? 
Samm has well-shaped hands. I 
was a person once, and so were 
you. Did I ever tell you that I 
was a beautiful woman once? 

S he had been a beautiful wom- 
an once and now she was the 
control of a small spaceship 
which fled across emptiness 
with two grotesque companions. 

She was now a ship only eleven 
meters long and shaped roughly 
like an ancient dirigible. Finster- 



nis was a perfect cube, fifty met- 
ers to the side, packed with ma- 
chinery which could blank out a 
sun and contain its planets until 
they froze to icy, perpetual death. 
Samm was a man, but he was 
a man of flexible steel, two hun- 
dred meters high. He was de- 
signed to walk on any kind of 
planet, with any kind of inhabi- 
tant, with any kind of chemistry 
or any kind of gravity: he was 
designed to bring antagonists, 
whomever they might be, the 
message of the power of man. 
The power of man . followed 
by terror, followed if necessary 
by death. If Samm failed, Fin- 
sternis had the further power of 
blocking out the sun, Linschoten 
XV. If either or both failed. Fol- 
ly had the job of adjusting them 
so that they could win. If they 
had no chance of winning, she 
then had the task of destroying 
Finsternis and Samm, and then 
herself. 

Their instructions were clear: 

You will not, you will not un- 
der any circumstances return. 
You will not, you will not un- 
der any conditions turn back to- 
ward Earth. You are too danger- 
ous to come anywhere near 
Earth, ever again. You may live 
if you wish. If you can. But you 
must not  repeat not  come 
back. You have your duty. You 
asked for it. Now you have it. 
Do not, come back. Your forms 



106 



GALAXY 



fit your duty. You will do your 
duty. 

Folly had become a tiny ship, 
crammed with miniaturized 
equipment. 

Finsternis had become a cube 
blacker than darkness itself. 

Samm had become a man. but 
a man different from any which 
had ever been seen on Earth. He 
had a metal body, copied from 
the human form down to the last 
detail. That way the enemies, 
whoever they might be, would be 
given a terrible glimpse of the 
human shape, the human voice. 
Two hundred meters high he 
stood, strong and solid enough to 
fly through space with nothing 
but the jets on his belt. 

The Instrumentality had de- 
signed all three of them. De- 
signed them well. 

Designed them to meet the 
crazy menace out beyond the 
stars, a menace which gave no 
clue to its technology or origin, 
but which responded to the sig- 
nal man with the counter-sig- 
nal, gabble cackle! eat, eat! 
man, man! good to eat! cackle- 
gabble! eat, eat! 

That was enough. 

The Instrumentality took steps. 
And the three of them  the ship, 
the cube and the metal giant  
sped between the stars to con- 
quer, to terrorize or to destroy 
the menace which lived on the 
third planet of Linschoten XV. 



Or, if needful, to put out that 
particular sun. 

Folly, who had become a ship, 
wa,- the most volatile of the 
three. 

She had been a beautiful wom- 
an once. 



II 



(,^'% 7'on were a beautiful wom- 
an once, Samm had said, 
some years before. How did you 
end up becoming a ship? 

I killed myself, said Folly. 
Thats why I took this name. 
Folly. I had a long life ahead of 
me, but I killed myself and they 
brought me back at the last min- 
ute. When I found out I Vi/as still 
alive, I volunteered for some- 
thing adventurous, dangerous. 
They gave me this. Well, I 
asked for it, didnt I? 

You asked for it, said Samm 
gravely. Out in the middle of 
nothing, surrounded by a tre- 
mendous lot of nowhere, courtesy 
was still the lubricant which gov- 
erned human relationships. The 
two of them observed courtesy 
and kindness toward one another. 
Sometimes they threw in a bit of 
humor, too. 

Finsternis did not take part in 
their talk or their companionship. 
He did not even verbalize his 
answers. He merely let them 
know his sense of the situation 
and this time, as in all other 



THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



107 



times, his response was  Neg- 
ative. No operation needed. Com- 
munication nonfunctional. Not 
needed here. Silence, please. I kill 
suns. That is all I do. My part is 
my business, not yours. My past 
is my business. All mine. This 
was communicated in a single 
terrible thought, so that Folly 
and Samm stopped trying to 
bring Finsternis into the conver- 
sations which they started up, ev- 
ery subjective century or so, and 
continued for years at a time. 

Finsternis merely moved along 
with them, several kilometers 
away, but well within their range 
of awareness. But as far as com- 
pany was concerned, Finsternis 
might as well not have been there 
at all. 

Samm went on with the conver- 
sation, the conversation which 
they had had so many hundreds 
of times since the planoform ship 
had discharged them near 
Linschoten XV and left them to 
make the rest of their way alone. 
(If the menace were really a 
menace, and if it were intelligent, 
the Instrumentality had no in- 
tention of letting an actual plan- 
oform ship fall within the powers 
of a strange form of life which 
might well be hypnotic in its 
combat capacities. Hence the 
ship, the cube and the giant were 
launched into normal space at 
high velocity, equipped with jets 
to correct their courses, and left 



to make their own away to the 
danger.) 

Samm said, as he always did, 
You were a beautiful woman. 
Folly, but you wanted to die. 
Why? 

Why do people ever want to 
die, Samm? Its the power in us, 
the vitality which makes us want 
so much. Life always trembles 
on the edge of disappointment. 
If we hadnt been vital and 
greedy and lustful and yearning, 
if we hadnt had big thoughts and 
wanted bigger ones, we would 
have stayed animals, like all the 
little things back on Earth. Its 
strong life that brings us so close 
to death. We cant stand the 
beauty of it, the nearness of the 
things we want, the remoteness of 
the things that we can have. You 
and me and Finsternis, now, were 
monsters riding out between the 
stars. And yet were happier now 
than we were when we were back 
among people. I was a beautiful 
woman, but there were specific 
things which I wanted. I wanted 
them myself. I alone. For me. 
Only for me. When I couldnt 
have them, I wanted to die. If I 
had been stupider or happier I 
might have lived on. But I didnt. 
I was me  intensely me. So here 
I am. I dont even know whether 
I have a body or not, inside this 
ship. Theyve got me all hooked 
up to the sensors and the view- 
ers and the computers. Some- 



108 



GALAXY 




times I think that I may be a 
lovely woman still, with a real 
body hidden somewhere inside 
this ship, waiting to step out and 
to be a person again. And you, 
Samm, dont you want to tell me 
about yourself? Samm. SAMM. 
Thats no name for an actual 
person  Superordinated Alien 
Measuring and Mastery device. 
What were you before they gave 
you that big body? At least you 
still look like a person. Youre 
not a ship, like me. 

My name doesnt matter. Fol- 
ly, and if I told it to you, you 
wouldnt know it. You never 
knew it. 

How wouldnt I know? she 
cried. Ive never told you my 



name either, so perhaps we did 
know each other back on Old 
Earth when we were still people. 

C4T can tell something, said 
Samm, from the shape of 
words, from the ring of thoughts, 
even when were not out here in 
nothing. You were a lady, per- 
haps highborn. You were truly 
beautiful. You were really im- 
portant. And I  I was a tech- 
nician. A good one. I did my 
work and I loved my family, and 
my wife and I were happy with 
every child which the Lords gave 
us for adoption. But my wife died 
first. And after a while my chil- 
dren, my wonderful boy and my 
two beautiful, intelligent girls  



THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



109 



my own children, they couldnt 
stand me anymore. They didnt 
like me. Perhaps I talked too 
much. Perhaps I gave them too 
much advice. Perhaps I remind- 
ed them of their mother, who was 
dead. I dont know. I wont ever 
know. They didnt want to see 
me. Out of manners, they sent 
me cards on my birthday. Out of 
sheer formal courtesy, they 
called on me sometimes. Now 
and then one of them wanted 
something. Then they came to 
me, but it was always just to get 
something. It took me a long time 
to figure out, but I hadnt done 
anything. It wasnt what I had 
done or hadnt done. They just 
plain didnt like me. You know 
the songs and the operas and the 
stories. Folly, you know them 
all. 

Not all of them, thought Fol- 
ly gently, not all of them. Just 
a few thousand. 

Did you ever see one, cried 
Samm, his thoughts ringing 
fiercely against her mind, did 
you ever see a single one about a 
rejected father? Theyre all 
about men and women, love and 
sex, but I can tell you that re- 
jection hurts even when you dont 
ask anything of your loved ones 
but their company and their hap- 
piness and their simple genuine 
smiles. When I knew that my 
children had no use for me, I had 
no use for me either. The Instru- 
110 



mentality came along with this 
warning, and I volunteered. 

But youre all right now, 
Samm, said Folly gently. Im a 
ship and you are a metal giant 
but were off doing work which 
is important for all mankind. 
Well have adventures together. 
Even black and grumbly here, 
she added, meaning Finsternis, 
cant keep us from the excite- 
ment of companionship or the 
hope of danger. Were doing 
something wonderful and impor- 
tant and exciting. Do you know 
what I would do if I had my life 
again, my ordinary life with skin 
and toenails and hair and things 
like that? 

What? asked Samm, know- 
ing the answer perfectly well 
from the hundreds of times they 
had touched on this point. 

Id take baths. Hundreds and 
hundreds of them, over again. 
Showers and dips in cold pools 
and soaks in hot bathtubs and 
rinses and more showers. And I 
would do my hair, over and over 
again, thousands of different 
ways. And I would put on lip- 
stick, in the most outrageous col- 
ors, even if nobody saw me, ex- 
cept for my own self looking in 
the mirror. Now I can hardly re- 
member what it used to be to be 
dry or wet. Im in this ship and 
I see the ship and I do not really 
know if I am a person or not any 
more. 



GALAXY 



Samm stayed quiet, knowing 
what she would say next. 

Samm, what would you do? 
Folly asked. 

Swim, he said. 

Then swim, Samm, swim! 
Swim for me in the space be- 
tween the stars. You still have a 
body and I dont, but I can 
watch you and I can sense you 
swimming out here in the noth- 
ing-at-all. 

Samm began to swim a huge 
Australian crawl, dipping his face 
to the edge of the water  as if 
there were water there. The ges- 
tures made no difference in his 
real motion, since they were all of 
them in the fast trajectory com- 
puted for them from the point 
where they left the Instrumen- 
talitys ship and started out in 
normal space for the star listed 
as Linschoten XV. 

This time, something very 
sudden happened, and, it hap- 
pened strangely. 

From the dark gloomy silence 
of the cube Finsternis, there 
came an articulate cry, called 
forth in clear human speech; 

Stop it! Stop moving right 
now. 1 attack. 

Both Samm and Folly had in- 
struments built into them, so 
they could read space around 
them. The instruments, quickly 
scanned, showed nothing. Yet 
Folly felt odd, as though some- 
thing had gone very wrong in her 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



ship-self, which had seemed so 
metal, so reliable, so inalterable. 

She threw a thought of inquiry 
at Samm and instead got another 
command from Finsternis, Dont 
think. 

Ill 

S amm floated like a dead man 
in his gargantuan body. 
Folly drifted like a fruit beside 
his hand. 

At last there came words from 
Finsternis : 

You can think now, if you 
want to. You can chatter at each 
other again. Im through. 

Samm thought at him, and the 
thought-pattern was troubled 
and confused: What happened? 
I felt as though the immaculate 
grid of space had been pinched 
together in a tight fold. I felt you 
do something, and then there was 
silence around us again. 

Talking, said Finsternis, is 
not operational and it is not re- 
quired of me. But there are only 
three of us here, so I might as 
well tell you what happened. 
Can you hear me. Folly? 

Yes, she said, weakly. 

Are we on course, asked Fin- 
sternis, for the third planet of 
Linschoten XV? 

F oily paused while checking all 
her instruments, which were more 
compheated and refined than 
those carried by the other two, 

111 



since she was the maintenance 
unit. Yes, said she at last. We 
are exactly on course. I dont 
know what happened, if anything 
did happen. 

Something happened, all 
right, said Finsternis, with the 
gratified savagery of a person 
whose quick-and-cruel nature is 
rewarded only by meeting and 
overcoming hostility in real life. 

Was it a space dragon, like 
they used to meet on the old, old 
ships? 

No, nothing like that, said 
Finsternis, communicative for 
once, since this was something 
operational to talk about. It 
doesnt even seem to be in this 
space at all. Something just rises 
up among us, like a volcano com- 
ing out of solid space. Something 
violent and wild and alive. Do 
you two still have eyes? 

Seeing devices for the ordi- 
nary light band? asked Samm. 

Of course we do! said Fin- 
stemis. I will try to fix it so that 
you will have a visible input. 

There was a sharp pause from 
Finsternis. 

The voice came again, with 
much strain. 

Do not do anything. Do not 
try to help me. Just watch. If it 
wins, destroy me and destroy 
yourselves very quickly. It might 
try to capture us and get back 
to Earth. 

Folly felt like telling Finsternis 

112 



that this was unnecessary, since 
the first motion toward return 
would trigger destruction devices 
which had been built into each 
of the three of them, beyond 
reach, beyond detection, beyond 
awareness. When the Instrumen- 
tality said, Do not come back, 
the Instrumentality meant it. 

She said nothing. 

She watched Finsternis instead. 

Something began to happen. 

It was very odd. 

Space itself seemed to rip and 
leak. 

In the visible band, the intrud- 
er looked like a fountain of water 
being thrown randomly to and 
fro. 

But the intruder was not water. 

In the visible light-band, it 
glowed like wild fire rising from 
a shimmering column of blue ice. 
Here in space there was nothing 
to burn, nothing to make light: 
she knew that Finsternis was 
translating unresolvable phen- 
omena into light. 

She sensed Samm moving one 
of his giant fists uncontrollably, 
in a helpless, childish gesture of 
protest. 

She herself did nothing but 
watch, as alertly and passively 
as she could. 

Nevertheless, she felt wren- 
ched. This was no material phe- 
nomenon. It was wild unformed 
life, intruding out of some other 
proportion of space, seeking ma- 

GALAXY 



terial on which to impose its 
vitality, its frenzy, its identity. 
She could see Finsternis as a 
solid black cube, darker than 
mere darkness, drifting right in- 
to the column. She watched the 
sides of Finsternis. 

On the earlier part of the trip, 
since they had left the people 
and the planoform ship and had 
been discharged in a fast tra- 
jectory toward Linschoten XV, 
Finsternis sides had seemed like 
dull metal, slightly burnished, 
so that Folly had to brush him 
lightly vdth radar to get a clear 
image of him. 

Now his sides had changed. 

They had become as soft and 
thick as velvet. 

The strange volcano-fountain 
did not seem to have much in the 
way of sensing devices. It paid no 
attention to Samm or to herself. 
The dark cube attracted it, as 
a shaft of sunlight might attract 
a baby or as the rustle of paper 
might draw the attention of a 
kitten. 

With a slight tvdst of its vital- 
ity and direction, the whole 
column of burning, living bright- 
ness plunged upon Finsternis, 
plunged and burned out and went 
in and was seen no more. 

F insternis voice, clear and 
cheerful, sounded out to 
both of them: 

Its gone now. 

THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



What happened to it? asked 
Samm. 

I ate it, said Finsternis. 

You what? cried Folly. 

I ate it, said Finsternis. He 
was talking more than he ever 
had before. At least, thats the 
only way I can describe it. This 
machine they gave me or made 
me into or whatever they did, 
its really rather good. Its power- 
ful. I can feel it absorbing things, 
taking them in, taking them 
apart, putting them away. Its 
something like eating used to be 
when I was a person. That wild 
thing attacked me, wrapped me 
up, devoured me. All I did was 
to take it in, and now its gone. 
I feel sort of full. I suppose my 
machines are sorting our samples 
of it to send away to rendezvous 
points in little rockets. I know 
that I have sixteen small rockets 
inside me, and I can feel two of 
them getting ready to move. Nei- 
ther one of you could have done 
what I do. I was built to aosorb 
whole suns if necessary, break 
them down, freeze them down, 
change their molecular structure 
and shoot their vitality off in one 
big useless blast on the radio 
spectrum. You couldnt do any- 
thing like that, Samm, even if 
ycu do have arms and legs and 
a head and a voice  if we ever 
get into an atmosphere for you 
to use it in. You couldnt do 
what I have just done. Folly. 

113 



Youre ^ood, said Folly, with 
emphasis. But she added: I can 
repair you. 

Obviously offended, Finsternis 
withdrew into his silence. 

Samm said to Folly, How 
much further to destination? 
Said Folly promptly, Seven- 
ty-nine earth years, four months 
and three days, six hours and two 
minutes, but you know how little 
that means out here. It could 
seem like a single afternoon or it 
could feel to us like a thousand 
lifetimes. Time doesnt work 
very well for us. 

How did Earth ever find this 
place, anyhow? said Samm. 

All I know is that it was two 
very strong telepaths, working to- 
gether on the planet Mizzer. An 
ex-dictator named Casher ONeill 
and an ex-Lady named Celalta. 
They were doing a bit of psionic 
astronomy and suddenly this sig- 
nal came in strong and clear. You 
know that telepaths can catch di- 
rections very accurately. Even 
over immense distances. And 
they can get emotions, too. But 
they are not very good at actual 
images or things. Somebody else 
checked it out for them. 

M-m-m, said Samm. He had 
heard all this before. Out of sheer 
boredom, he went back to swim- 
ming vigorously. The body might 
not really be his, but it made him 
feel good to exercise it. 

Besides, he knew that Folly 
114 



watched him with pleasure  
great pleasure, and a little bit of 
envy. 

Rasher ONeill and the Lady 
Celalta had finished with 
making love. 

They had lain with their bodies 
tired and their minds clear, re- 
laxed. They had stretched out 
on a blanket just above the big 
gushing spring which was the 
source of the Ninth Nile. Both 
telepaths, they could hear a bird- 
couple quarreling inside a tree, 
the male bird commanding the 
female to get out and get to 
work and the female answering 
by dropping deeper and deeper 
into a fretful and irritable sleep. 

The Lady Celalta had whis- 
pered a thought to her lover and 
master, Casher ONeill. 

To the stars? 

The stars? thought he with 
a grumble. They were both strong 
telepaths. He had been imprinted, 
in some mysterious way, with 
the greatest telepath-hypnotist of 
all time, the Honorable Agatha 
Madigan, who had gone down in 
history as the Hechizera of Gort- 
falon, the only person in history 
to hypnotize the men and robots 
of a battle fleet so that it des- 
troyed itself in open space. Cash- 
er ONeill had also retained dim 
memories of a half-grown girl, in- 
credibly lovely in a simple blue 
dress, lost to him somewhere be- 

GALAXY 



yond amnesiac stars, but in the 
Lady Celalta he had a compan- 
ion worthy of his final talents, a 
natural telepath who could her- 
self reach not only all of Miz- 
zer but some of the nearer stars. 
When they teamed up together, 
as she now proposed, they could 
plunge into dusty infinities of 
depth and bring back feelings or 
images which no Go-Captain had 
ever found with his ship. 

He sat up with a grunt of as- 
sent. 

She looked at him fondly, pos- 
sessively, her dark eyes alight 
with alertness, happiness, pos- 
sessiveness and adventure. 

Can I lift? she asked, almost 
timidly. 

When two telepaths worked to- 
gether, one cleared the vision for 
both of them as far as their com- 
binded minds could reach and 
then the other sprang, with enor- 
mous effort as far and as fast as 
possible toward any target which 
presented itself. They had found 
strange things, sometimes beauti- 
ful or dramatic ones, by this 
method. 

Casher was already drinking 
enormous gulps of air, filling his 
lungs, holding his breath, letting 
go with a gasp, and then inhaling 
deeply and slowly again. In this 
way he reoxygenated his brain 
very thoroughly for the huge ef- 
fort of a telepathic dive into the 
remote depth of space. He did 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



not even speak to her, nor did he 
telepath a word to her; he ivas 
conserving his strength for a good 
jump. 

He merely nodded to her. 

The Lady Celalta, too, began 
the deep breathing, but she seem- 
ed to need it less than did Cash- 
er. 

They were both sitting up, side 
by side, breathing deeply. 

The cool night sands of Mizzer 
were around them, the harmless 
gurgle of the Ninth Nile beside 
them, the bright star-cluttered 
sky of Mizzer was above them. 

Her hand reached out and took 
hold of his. 

She squeezed his hand. He 
looked at her and nodded to her 
again. 

Within his mind, Mizzer and 
its entire solar system seemed 
to burst into flame with a new 
kind of light. The radiance of 
Celalta s mind trailed off uneven- 
ly in different directions but 
there, almost 2 off the pole of 
Mizzers ecliptic, he felt some- 
thing wild and strange, a kind 
of being which he had never 
sensed before. Using Celaltas 
mind as a base, he let his mind 
dive for it. 

The distance'of the plunge left 
them both dizzy, sitting on the 
quiet night sands of Mizzer. It 
seemed to both of them that the 
mind of man had never reached 
so far before. 



115 



IV 



The reality of the phenomenon 
was undoubtable. 

There were animals all around 
them, the usual categories: run- 
ners, hunters, jumpers, climbers, 
swimmers, hiders and handlers. 
It was some of the handlers who 
were intensely telepathic them- 
selves. 

The image of man creat- 
ed an immediate, murderous re- 
sponse : 

Cackle gabble, gabble cack- 
le, man, man, man, eat them, eat 
them! 

Casher and Celalta were both 
so surprised that they let the con- 
tact go, after making sure that 
they had touched a whole world 
full of beings, some of them tele- 
pathic and probably civilized. 

How had the beings known 
man? Why had their response 
been immediate? Why anthropo- 
phagous and homicidal? 

They took time, before com- 
ing completely out of the trance, 
to make a careful, exact note of 
the direction from which the 
danger-brains had shrieked their 
weaning. 

This they submitted to the In- 
strumentality, shortly after the 
incident. 

And that was how, unknown 
to Folly, Samm and Finsternis, 
the inhabitants on the third 
planet of Linschoten XV had 
come to the attention of man- 
kind. 

116 



Asa matter of fact, the three 
wanderers later on felt a 
vague, remote telepathic contact 
which they sensed as being warm- 
hearted and human, and there- 
fore did not try to track down, 
with their minds or their wea- 
pons. It was ONeill and Celalta, 
many years later by Mizzer time, 
reaching to see what the Instru- 
mentality had done about Lins- 
choten XV. 

Folly, Samm and Finsternis 
had no suspicion that the two 
most powerful telepaths in the 
human area of the galaxy had 
stroked them, searched them, felt 
them through, and seen things 
about them which the three of 
them did not know about them- 
selves or about each other. 

Casher ONeill said to the 
Lady Celalta: 

You got it, too? 

A beautiful woman, encased 
in a little ship? 

Casher nodded: A red-head 
with skin as soft and transparent 
as living ivory? A woman who 
was beautiful and will be beauti- 
ful again? 

Thats what I got, said the 
Lady Celalta. And the tired old 
man, weary of his children and 
weary of his own life because his 
children were weary of him. 
Not so old, said Casher 
ONeill. And isnt that a spec- 

GALAXY 




tacular piece of machinery they 
put him into? A metal giant. It 
felt like something about a quar- 
ter of a kilometer high. Acid- 
proof. Cold-proof. Wont he be 
surprised when he finds that the 
Instrumentality has rejuvenated 
his own body inside that mon- 
ster? 

He certainly will be, said the 
Lady Celalta happily, thinking 
of the pleasant surprise which 
lay ahead of a man whom she 
would never know or see with 
her own bodily eyes. 

They both fell silent. 

Then said the Lady Celalta, 
But the third person . . There 
was a shiver in her voice as 
though she dared not ask the 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



question. The third person, the 
one in the cube. She stopped, 
as though she could neither ask 
nor say more. 

It was not a robot or a person- 
ality cube, said Casher ONeill. 
It was a human being all right. 
But its crazy. Could you make 
out, Celalta, as to whether it was 
male or female? 

No, said she, I couldnt tell. 
The other two seemed to think 
that it was male. 

But did you feel sure? asked 
Casher. 

With that being, I felt sure of 
nothing. It was human, all right, 
but it was stranger than any lost 
hominid we have ever felt around 
the forgotten stars. Could you 

117 



tel!, Casher, whether it was 
young or old? 

No, said he. I felt nothing 
 only a desperate human mind 
with all its guards up, living only 
because of the terrible powers of 
the black cube, the sun-killer in 
which it rode. I never sensed 
someone before who was a person 
without characteristics. Its fright- 
ening. 

The Instrumentality are cruel 
sometimes, said Celalta. 

Sometimes they have to be, 
Casher agreed. 

But I never thought that they 
would do that. 

Do what? asked Casher. 

Her dark eyes looked at him. 
It was a different night, and a 
different Nile, but the eyes were 
only a very little bit older and 
they loved him just as much as 
ever. The Lady Celalta trembled 
as though she herself might think 
that the all-powerful Instrumen- 
tality could have hidden a micro- 
phone in the random sands. She 
whispered to her lover, her mas- 
ter: 

You said it yourself, Casher, 
just a moment ago. 

Said what? He spoke tender- 
ly but fearlessly, his voice ring- 
ing out over the cool night sands. 

'T'he Lady Celalta went on 
whispering, which was very 
unlike her usual self: You said 
that the third person was crazy. 
118 



Do you realize that you may 
have spoken the actual literal 
truth? Her whisper darted at 
him like a snake. 

At last, he whispered back : 
What did you sense? What could 
you guess? 

They have sent a madman to 
the stars. Or a mad woman. A 
real psychotic. 

Lots of pilots, said Casher, 
speaking more normally, are 
cushioned against loneliness with 
real but artificially activated psy- 
choses. It gets them through me 
real or imagined horrors of the 
sufferings of space. 

I dont mean that, said Celal- 
ta, still whispering urgently and 
secretly. I mean a real psy- 
chotic. 

But there arent any. Not 
loose, that is, said Casher, 
stammering with surprise at last. 
They either get cured or they 
are bottled up in thought-proof 
satellites somewhere. 

Celalta raised her voice a little, 
just a little, so that she no longer 
whispered but spoke urgently. 

But dont you see, thats what 
they must have done. The In- 
strumentality made a star-killer 
too strong for any normal mind 
to guide. So the Lords got a 
psychotic somewhere, a real psy- 
chotic, and sent a madman out 
among the stars. Otherwise we 
could have felt its gender or its 
age. 



GALAXY 



Casher nodded in silent agree- 
ment. The air did not feel colder, 
but he got gooseflesh sitting be- 
side his beloved Celalta on the 
familiar desert sands. 

Youre right. You must be 
right. It almost makes me feel 
sorry for the enemies out near 
Linschoten Fifteen. Do you see 
nothing of them this time? I 
couldnt perceive them at all. 

I did, a little, said the Lady 
Celalta. Their telepaths have 
caught the strange minds coming 
at them with a high rate of speed. 
The telepathic ones are wild with 
excitement but the others are 
just going cackle-gabble, cackle- 
gabble with each other, filled with 
anger, hunger and the thought 
of man. 

You got that much? he said 
in wonder. 

My lord and my lover, I dived 
this time. Is it so strange that I 
sensed more than you did? Your 
strength lifted me. 

Did you hear what the wea- 
pons called each other? 

Something silly. He could 
see her knitting her brows in the 
bright starshine which illuminat- 
ed the desert almost the way that 
the Old Original Moon lit up the 
nights sometimes on Manhome 
Itself. It was Folly, and some- 
thing like Superordinated Alien 
Measuring and Mastery machine 
and something like darkness in 
the Ancient Doyches Language. 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



Thats what I got, too, said 
Casher. It sounds like a weird 
team. 

But a powerful one, a terribly 
powerful one, said the Lady 
Celalta. You and I, my lover 
and master, have seen strange 
things and dangers between 
the stars, even before we met 
each other, but we never saw any- 
thing like this before, did we? 
No, said he. 

Well, then, said she, let us 
sleep and forget the matter as 
much as we can. The Instrumen- 
tality is certainly taking care of 
Linschoten Fifteen, and we two 
not need botlier about it. 

And all that Samm, Folly and 
Finsternis knew was that a light 
touch, unexplained but friendly, 
had gone over them from the far 
star region near home. Thought 
they, if they thought anything 
about it at all, The Instrumen- 
tality, which made us and sent 
us, has checked up on us one 
more time. 

V 

few years later, Samm and 
Folly were talking again 
while Finsternis  guarded, 
impenetrable, uncommunicating, 
detectable only by the fierce glow 
of human life which shone tele- 
pathically out of the immense 
cube  rode space beside them 
and said nothing. 



119 



Suddenly Folly cried out to 
Samm loudly: 

I can smell them. 

Smell who? asked Samm 
mildly. There isnt any smell out 
here in the nothingness of 
space. 

Silly, thought Folly back, 
I dont mean really smell. I 
mean that I can pick up their 
sense of odor telepathically. 
Whose? said Samm, being 
dense. 

Our enemies, of course, 
cried Folly. The man-remem- 
berers who are not man. The 
cackle-gabble creatures. The be- 
ings who remember man and 
hate him. They smell thick and 
warm and alive to each other. 
Their whole world is full of 
smells. Their telepaths are get- 
ting frantic now. They have even 
figured out that there are three 
of us and they are trying to get 
our smells. 

And we have no smell. Not 
when we do not even know 
whether we have human bodies 
or not, inside these things. Im- 
agine this metal body of mine 
smelling. If it did have a smell, 
said Samm, it would probably 
be the very soft smell of work- 
ing steel and a little bit of lubri- 
cants, plus whatever odors my 
jets might activate inside an at- 
mosphere. If I know the Instru- 
mentality, they have made my 
jets smell awful to almost any 
120 



kind of being. Most forms of life 
think first through their noses 
and then figure out the rest of ex- 
perience later. After all, I was 
built to intimidate, to frighten, 
to destroy. The Instrumentality 
did not make this giant to be 
friendly with anybody. You and I 
can be friends. Folly, because you 
are a little ship which I could 
hold like a cigar between my 
fingers, and because the ship 
holds the memory of a very love- 
ly woman. I can sense what you 
once were. What you may still 
be, if your actual body is still in- 
side that boat. 

Oh, Samm! she cried. Do 
you think 1 might still be alive, 
really alive, with a real me in a 
real me, and a chance to be my- 
self somewhere again, out here 
between the stars? 

I cant sense it plainly, said 
Samm. Ive reached as much as 
I can through your ship with my 
sensors, but I cant tell whether 
theres a whole woman there or 
not. It might be just a memory of 
you dissected and laminated be- 
tween a lot of plastic sheets. 
I really cant tell, but some- 
times I have the strangest hunch 
that you are still alive, in the old 
ordinary way, and that I am alive 
too. 

Wouldnt that be wonderful! 
She almost shouted at him. 
Samm, imagine being us again, 
if we fulfill our mission and con- 

GALAXY 



quer this planet and stay alive 
and settle there! I might even 
meet you and   

They both fell silent at the im- 
plications of being ordinary-alive 
again. They knew that they loved 
each other. Out here, in the im- 
mense blackness of space, there 
was nothing they could do but 
streak along in their fast trajec- 
tories and talk to each other a 
little bit by telepathy. 

Samm, said Folly, and the 
tone of her thought showed that 
she was changing a difficult sub- 
ject. Do you think that we are 
the furthest out that people have 
ever gone? You used to be a 
technician. You might know. Do 
you? 

Of course I know, thought 
Samm promptly. Were not. 
After all, were still deep inside 
our own galaxy. 

I didnt know, said Folly 
contritely. 

With all those instruments, 
dont you know where you are? 

Of course I know where I am, 
Samm. In relation to the third 
planet of Linschoten XV. I even 
have a faint idea of the general 
direction in which Old Earth 
must lie, and how many thou- 
sands of ages it would take us 
to get home, travelling through 
ordinary space, if we did try to 
turn around. She thought to 
herself but didnt add in her 
thought to Samm, Which we 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



cant. She thought again to him, 
But Ive never studied astrono- 
my or navigation, so I couldnt 
tell whether we were at the edge 
of the galaxy or not. 

Nowhere near the edge, said 
Samm. Were not John Joy 
Tree and were nowhere near the 
two-headed elephants which weep 
forever in intergalactic space. 

C( Thn Joy Tree? sang Folly; 

av there was joy and memory 
in her thoughts as she sounded 
the name. He was my idol when 
I was a girl. My father was a 
subchief of the Instrumentality 
and always promised to bring 
John Joy Tree to our house. We 
had a country and it was unusual 
and very fine for this day and 
age. But mister and Go-Captain 
Tree never got around to visiting 
us, so there I was, a big girl 
with picture-cubes of him all 
over my room. I liked him be- 
cause he was so much older than 
me, and so resolute-looking and 
so tender too. I had all sorts of 
romantic day-dreams about him, 
but he never showed up and I 
married the wrong man several 
times, and my children got given 
to the wrong people, so here I am. 
But whats this stuff about two- 
headed elephants? 

Really? said Samm. I dont 
see how you could hear about 
John Joy Tree and not know 
what he did. 



121 



I knew he flew far, far out, 
but I didnt know exactly what 
he did. After all, I was just a 
child when I fell in love with his 
picture. What did he do? Hes 
dead now, I suppose, so I dont 
suppose it matters. 

Finsternis cut in, grimly and 
unexpectedly: John Joy Tree 
is not dead. Hes creeping around 
a monstrous place on an aban- 
doned planet, and he is immortal 
and insane. 

How did you know that? 
cried Samm, turning his enor- 
mous metal head to look at the 
dark burnished cube which had 
said nothing for so many years. 

There was no further thought 
from Finsternis, not a ghost, not 
an echo of a word. 

Folly prodded him: 

Its no use trying to make 
that thing talk if it doesnt want 
to. Weve both tried, thousands 
of times. Tell me about the two- 
headed elephants. Those are the 
big animals with large floppy ears 
and the noses that pick things 
up, arent they? And they make 
very wise, dependable under- 
people out of them? 

I dont know about the under- 
people part, but the animals are 
the kind you mention, very big 
indeed. When John Joy Tree got 
far outside our cosmos by flying 
through space he found an enor- 
mous procession of open ships 
flying in columns where there 
122 



was nothing at all. The ships 
were made by nothing which man 
has ever even seen. We still dont 
know where they came from or 
what made them. Each open ship 
had a sort of animal, something 
like an elephant with four front 
legs and a head at each end, and 
as he passed the unimaginable 
ships, these animals howled at 
him. Howled grief and mourning. 
Our best guess was that the 
ships were the tombs of some 
great race of beings and the howl- 
ing elephants the immortal half- 
living mourners who guarded 
them. 

But how did John Joy Tree 
ever get back? 

Ah, that was beautiful. If you 
go into spaces, you take noth- 
ing more than your own body with 
you. That was the finest engineer- 
ing the human race has ever done. 
They designed and built a whole 
planoform ship out of John Joy 
Trees skin, fingernails and hair. 
They had to change his body 
chemistry a bit to get enough 
metal in him to carry the coils 
and the electric circuits, but it 
worked. He came back. That was 
a man who could skip through 
space like a little boy hopping on 
familiar rocks. Hes the only pilot 
who ever piloted himself back 
home from outside our galaxy. I 
dont know whether it will be 
worth the time and treasure to 
use spaces for intergalactic trips. 

GALAXY 



After all, some very gifted people 
may have already fallen through 
by accident, Folly. You and Fin- 
sternis and I are people who 
have been built into machines. 
We are now ourselves the ma- 
chines. But with Tree they did 
it the other way around. They 
made a machine out of him. And 
it worked. In that one deep flight 
he went billions of times further 
than we will ever go. 

You think you know, said 
Finsternis unexpectedly. You 
think you know. Thats what you 
always do. You think you know. 
Folly and Samm tried to get 
Finsternis to talk some more, but 
nothing happened. After a few 
more rests and talks they were 
ready for landing on the third 
planet of Linschoten XV. 

''X^hey landed. 

They fought. 

Blood ran on the ground. Fire 
scorched the valleys and boiled 
the lakes. The telepathic world 
was full of the cackle-gabble of 
fright, hatred throwing itself in- 
to suicide, fury turning into sur- 
render, into deep despair, into 
hopelessless, and at last into a 
strange kind of quiet and love. 
Let us. not tell that story. 

It can be written some other 
time, told by some other voice. 

The beings died by thousands 
and tens of thousands while Fin- 
sternis sat on a mountain-top, 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



doing nothing. Folly wove death 
and destruction, uncoded langu- 
ages, drew maps, showed Samm 
the strong-points and the wea- 
pons which had to be destroyed. 
Part of the technology was very 
advanced, other parts were still 
tribal. The dominant race was 
that of the beings who had evolv- 
ed into handlers and thinkers; 
it was they who were the tele- 
paths. 

All hatred ceased as the haters 
died. 

Only the submissive ones lived 
on. 

Samm tore cities about with 
his bare metal hands, ripped 
heavy guns to pieces while they 
were firing at him, picking the 
gunners off the gun carriages as 
though they were lice, swimming 
oceans when he had to, with 
Folly darting and hovering 
around or ahead of him. 

Final surrender was brought 
by their strongest telepath, a very 
wise old male who had been 
hidden inside a deep mountain; 

You have come, people. We 
surrender. Some of us have al- 
ways known the truth. We are 
Earth-born, too. A cargo of chick- 
ens settled here unimaginable 
times ago. A time-twist tore us 
out of our convoy and threw us 
here. Thats way, v/hen we sensed 
you far across space, we caught 
the relationship of eat-and-eaten. 
Only, our brave ones had it 

123 




wrong. You eat us: we dont eat 
you. You are the masters now. 
We will serve you forever. Do 
you seek our death? 

No, no, said Folly. We 
came only to avert a danger, and 
we have done that. Live on, and 
on, but plan no war and make 
no weapons. Leave that to the 
Instrumentality. 

Blessed is the Instrumentality, 
whoever that may be. We accept 
124 



your terms. We belong to you. t, 

"^XThen this was done, the war 
was over. 

Strange things began to hap- 
pen. 

Wild voices sang from within 
Folly and Samm, voices not their 
own: 

Mission gone. Work finished. 

Go to hill with cube. Go and re- 
joice! 



GALAXY 



Samm and Folly hesitated. 
They had left Finsternis where 
they landed, halfway around the 
planet. 

The singing voices became 
more urgent: 

Go. Go. Go now. Go back to 
the cube. Tell the chicken-people 
to plant a lawn and a grove of 
trees. Go, go, go now to the 
good reward! 

They told the telepaths what 
had been said to them and voy- 
aged wearily up out of the atmo- 
sphere and back down for a 
landing at the original point of 
contact, a long low hill which 
had been planted with huge 
patches of green turf and freshly 
transplanted trees even in the 
hours in which they flew off the 
world and back on it again. The 
bird-telepaths must have had 
strong and quick commands. 

The singing became pure music 
as they landed, chorales of re- 
ward and rejoicing, with the hint 
of martial marches and victory 
fugues woven in. 

Alan, stand up, said the voices 
to Samm. 

Samm stood on the ridge of 
the hill. He stood like a colos- 
sus against the red-dawning sky. 
A friendly, quiet crowd of the 
chicken-people fell back. 

Alan, put your hand to your 
right forehead, sang the voices. 

Samm obeyed. He did not 
know why the voices called him 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



Alan. 

Ellen, land, sang the rejoic- 
ing voices to Folly. Folly, herself 
a little ship, landed at Samms 
feet. She was bewildered with 
happy confusion and a great deal 
of pain which did not seem to 
matter much. 

Alan, come forth, sang the 
voices. Samm felt a sharp pain 
as his forehead  his huge metal 
forehead, two hundred meters 
above the ground  burst open 
and closed again. There was 
something pink and helpless in 
his hand. 

The voices commanded, Alan, 
put your hand gently on the 
ground. 

Samm obeyed and put his hand 
on the ground. The little pink toy 
fell on the fresh turf. It was a 
tiny miniature of a man. 

Ellen, stand forth, sang the 
voices again. The ship named 
Folly opened a door and a naked 
young woman fell out. 

Alma, wake up. The cube 
named Finsternis turned darker 
than charcoal. Out of the dark 
side, there stumbled a black- 
haired girl. She ran across the 
hill-slope to the figure named 
Ellen. The man-body named 
Alan was struggling to his feet. 

The three of them stood up. 

The voices spoke to them: 
This is our last message. You 
have done your work. You are 
well. The boat named Folly con- 

125 



VI 



tains tools, medicine and the oth- 
er equipment for a human colony. 
The giant named Samm will 
stand forever as a monument to 
human victory. The cube named 
Finsternis will now dissolve. 
Alan! Ellen! Treat Alma loving- 
ly and well. She is now a for- 
getty. 

The three naked people stood 
bewildered in the dawn. 

Good-by and a great high 
thanks from the Instrumentality. 
This is a pre-coded message, ef- 
fective only if you won. You 
have won. Be happy. Live on! 

Ellen took Alma  who had 
been Finsternis  and held her 
tight. The great cube dissolved 
into a shapeless slag-heap. Alan, 
who had been Samm, looked up 
at his former body dominating 
the skyline. 

For reasons which the travelers 
did not understand until many 
years had passed, the bird-peo- 
ple around them broke into ulu- 
lant hymns of peace, welcome 
and joy. 

My house, said Ellen, point- 
ing at the little ship which had 
spat forth her body just minutes 
ago, is now a home for all of 
us. 

They climbed into the success- 
ful little ship which had been 
called Folly. They knew, some- 
how, that they would find clothes 
and food. And wisdom, too. They 
did. 

126 



''T^en years later, they had the 
proof of happiness playing 
in the yard before their house  
a substantial building, made of 
stone and brick, which the local 
people had built under Alans di- 
rections. (They had changed their 
whole technology in the process 
of learning from him, and  
thanks to the efficiency and 
power of the telepathic priestly 
caste  things learned at any 
one spot on the planet were swift- 
ly disseminated to the whole 
group of races on the planet.) 
The proof of happiness consisted 
of the thirty-five human children 
playing in the yard. Ellen had 
had nine, four sets of twins and 
a single. Alma had had twelve, 
two sets of quintuplets and a 
pair of twins. The other fourteen 
had been bottle-grown from ova 
and sperm which they found in 
the ship, the frozen donations of 
complete strangers who had done 
their bit for the offworld settling 
of the human race. Thanks to the 
careful genetic coding of both the 
womb-children and the bottle- 
children, there was a variety of 
types, suitable for natural breed- 
ing over many generations to 
come. 

Alan same to the door. He 
measured the time by the place 
where the great shadow fell. It 
was hard to realize that the gigan- 

GALAXY 



tic, indestructible statue which 
loomed above them all had once 
been his own self. A small glacier 
was beginning to form around 
the feet of Samm and the night 
was getting cold. 

Im bringing the children in 
already, said Ch-tikkik, one of 
the local nurses they had hired 
to help with the huge brood of 
human babies. She, in return, 
got the privilege of hatching her 
eggs on the warm shelf behind the 
electric stove; she turned them 
every hour, eagerly awaiting the 
time that sharp little mouths 
would break the shell and hrunan- 
like little hands would tear an 
opening from which a human- 
like baby would emerge, oddly- 
pretty-ugly like a gnome, and 
unusual only in that it could 
stand upright from the moment 
of birth. 

One little boy was arguing 
with Ch-tikkik. He wore a warm 
robe of vegetable-fiber veins 
knitted to serve as a base for a 
feather cloak. He was pointing 
out that with such a robe he 
could survive a blizzard and 
claiming, quite justly, that he 
did not have to be in the house 
in order to stay warm. Was that 
Rupert? thought Alan. 

He was about to call the child 
when his two wives came to the 
door, arm in arm, flushed with 
the heat of the kitchen where 
they had been cooking the two 
THREE TO A GIVEN STAR 



dinners together  one dinner 
for the human, now numbering 
thirty-seven, and the other for the 
bird-people, who were tremen- 
dously appreciative of getting 
cooked food, Irut v/ho had odd re- 
quirements in the recipes, such 
as one quart of finely ground 
granite gravel to each gallon of 
oatmeal, sugared to taste and 
served with soybean milk. 

Alan stood behind his wives 
and put a hand on the shoulder 
of each. 

Its hard to think, he said, 
that a little over ten years ago, 
we didnt even know that we were 
still people. Now look at us, a 
family, and a good one. 

Alma turned her face up to be 
kissed, and Ellen, who was less 
sentimental, lifted 'ner face to be 
kissed too, so that her co-wife 
would not be embarrassed at be- 
ing babied separately. The two 
liked each other very much. Al- 
ma came out of the cube Finis- 
ternis as a forgetty, conditioned 
to remember nothing of her long 
sad psychotic life before the In- 
strumentality had sent her on a 
wild mission among the stars. 
When she had joined Alan and 
Ellen, she knew the words of the 
Old Common Tongue, but very 
little else. 

Ellen had had some time 
to teach her, to love her and to 
mother her before any of the 
babies were born, and the reT- 

127 



tionship between the two oi thein 
was warm and good. 

^'T^he three parents stood aside 
as the bird-women, wearing 
their comfortable and pretty 
feather cloaks, herded the chil- 
dren into the house. The smallest 
children had already been 
brought in from their sunning and 
were being given their bottles by 
bird-girls who never got tired of 
watching the cuteness and help- 
lessness of the human infant. 

Its hard to think of that time 
at all, said Ellen, who had been 
Folly. I wanted beauty and 
fame and a perfect marriage and 
nobody even told me that they 
just didnt go together. I have 
had to come to the end of the 
stars to get what I wanted, to 
be what I might become. 

And me, said Alma, who had 
been Finsternis, I had a worse 
problem. I was crazy. I was 
afraid of life. I didnt know how 
to be a person. I didnt even 
know how to be a woman, a 
sweetheart, a female, a mother. 
How could I ever guess that I 
needed a sister and wife, like the 
one you have been, to make my 
life whole? Without you to show 
me, Ellen, I could never have 
married our husband. I thought I 
was carrying murder among the 
stars, but I was carrying my own 
solution as well. Where else 
could I turn out to be me? 

128 



And I, said Alan, who had 
been Samm, became a metal 
giant between the stars because 
my first wife was dead and my 
own children forgot me and neg- 
lected me. Nobody can say Im 
not a father now. Thirty-five, and 
more than half of them mine. 
Ill be more of a father than 
any other man of the human race 
has ever been. 

There was a change in the sha- 
dow as the enormous right arm 
swung quietly but heavily to- 
ward the sky as a prelude to the 
sharp robotic call that nightfall, 
calculated with astronomical pre- 
cision, had indeed come to the 
place where he stood. 

The arm reached its height, 
pointing straight up. 

I used to do that, said Alan. 

The cry came, something like 
a silent pistol-shot which all of 
them heard, but a shot without 
echoes, without reverberations. 

Alan looked around. All the 
children are in. Even Rupert. 
Come in, my darlings, and let us 
have dinner together. Alma and 
EUen went ahead of him and he 
barred the heavy doors behind 
them. 

This was peace and happiness; 
that at last was goodness. They 
had no obligation but to live and 
to be happy. The threat and the 
promise of victory were far, far 
behind. 

CORDWAINER SMITH 
GALAXY 



SMALL DEER 

by CLIFFORD D. SIMAK 



Something killed the dinosaurs. 
And where's that Something now? 



Willow Bend, Wisconsin 
June 23, 1966 
Dr. Wyman Jackson, 

Wyalusing College, 

Muscoda, Wisconsin 

My dear Dr. Jackson: 

I am writing to you because 
I dont know who else to write 
to and there is something I have 
to tell someone who can under- 
stand. I know your name because 
I read your book, Cretaceous 
Dinosaurs, not once, but many 
times. I tried to get Dennis to 
read it, too, but I guess he never 
did. All Dennis ever was inter- 
ested in were the mathematics 
of his time concept  not the 
time machine itself. Besides, 



Dennis doesnt read too well. It 
is a chore for him. 

Maybe I should tell you, to 
start with, that my name is Alton 
James. I live with my widowed 
mother and I run a fix-it shop. I 
fix bicycles and lawn mowers and 
radios and television sets  I fix 
anything that is brought in to me. 
Im not much good at anything 
else, but I do seem to have the 
knack of seeing how things go 
together and understanding how 
they work and seeing what is 
wrong with them when they 
arent working. I never had no 
training of any sort, but I just 
seem to have a natural bent for 
getting along with mechanical 
contraptions. 

Dennis is my friend and Ill 



129 



admit right off that he is a 
strange one. He doesnt know 
from nothing about anything, but 
hes nuts on mathematics. Peo- 
ple in town make fun of him be- 
cause he is so strange and Ma 
gives me hell at times for having 
anything to do with him. She 
says hes the next best thing to 
a village idiot. I guess a lot of 
people think the way that Ma 
does, but its not ei^J:irely true, 
for he does know his math. 

I dont know how he knows it. 

He didnt learn it at school 
and thats for sure. When he got 
to be 17 and hadnt got no far- 
ther than eighth grade, the school 
just sort of dropped him. He 
didnt really get to eighth grade 
honest; the teachers after a while 
got tired of seeing him on one 
grade and passed him to the next. 
There was talk, off and on, of 
sending him to some special 
school, but it never got nowhere. 

And dont ask me what kind 
of mathematics he knew. I tried 
to read up on math once because 
I had the feeling, after seeing 
some of the funny marks that 
Dennis put on paper, that maybe 
he knew more about it than any- 
one else in the world. And I still 
think that he does  or that 
maybe hes invented an entirely 
new kind of math. For in the 
books I looked through I never 
did find any of the symbols that 



Dennis put on paper. Maybe 
Dennis used symbols he made up, 
inventing them as he went along, 
because no one had ever told 
him what the regular mathemati- 
cians used. But I dont think 
thats it  Im inclined to lean to 
the idea Dennis came up with a 
new brand of math, entirely. 

There were times I tried to 
talk with Dennis about this math 
of his and each time he was sur- 
prised that I didnt know it, too. 
I guess he thought most people 
knew about it. He said that it 
was simple, that it was plain as 
day. It was the way things work- 
ed, he said. 

I suppose youll want to ask 
how come I understood his equa- 
tions well enough to make the 
time machine. The answer is I 
didnt..! suppose that Dennis and 
I are alike in a lot of ways, but 
in different ways. I know how to 
make contraptions work (without 
knowing any of the theory) and 
Dennis sees the entire universe 
as something operating mathe- 
matically (and him scarcely able 
to read a page of simple type.) 

And another thing. My family 
and Dennis family live in the 
same end of town and from the 
time we were toddlers, Dennis 
and I played together. Later on, 
we just kept on together. We 
didnt have a choice. For some 
reason or other, none of the kids 
would play with us. Unless we 



130 



GALAXY 



iwanted to play alone, we had to 
play together. I guess we got so, 
through the years, that we under- 
stood each other. 

I dont suppose thered been 
any time machine if I hadnt 
been so interested in paleontol- 
ogy. Not that I knew anything 
about it; I was just interested. 
From the time I was a kid I 
read everything I could lay my 
hands on about dinosaurs and 
saber-tooths and such. Later on 
I went fossil hunting in the hills, 
but I never found nothing really 
big. Mostly I found brachiopods. 
There are great beds of them in 
the Platteville limestone. And 
lots of times Id stand in the 
street and look up at the river 
bluffs above the town and try 
to imagine what it had been like 
a million years ago, or a hundred 
million. When I first read in a 
story about a time machine, I 
remember thinking how Id like 
to have one. I guess that at one 
time I thought a little about 
making one, but then realized I 
couldnt. 

'TAennis had a habit of coming 
to my shop and talking, but 
most of the time talking to him- 
self rather than to me. I dont 
remember exactly how it started, 
but after a while I realized that 
he had stopped talking about 
anything but time. One day he 
told me he had been able to 



figure out everything but time, 
and now it seemed he was get- 
ting that down in black and 
white, like all the rest of it. 

IMostly I didnt pay too much 
attention to what he said, for a 
lot of it didnt make much sense. 
But after hed talked, incessantly, 
for a week or two, on time, I be- 
gan to pay attention. But dont 
expect me to tell you what he 
said or make any sense of it, 
for theres no way that I can. 
To understand what Dennis said 
and meant, youd have to live 
with him, like I did, for twenty 
years or more. Its not so much 
understanding what Dennis says 
as understanding Dennis. 

I dont think we actually made 
any real decision to build a time 
machine. It just sort of grew on 
us. All at once we found that we 
were making one. 

We took our time. We had to 
take our time, for we went back 
a lot and did things over, almost 
from the start. It took weeks to 
get some of the proper effects  
at least, thats what Dennis called 
them. Me, I didnt know any- 
thing about effects. All that I 
knew was that Dennis wanted to 
make something work a certain 
way and I tried to make it work 
that way Sometimes, even when 
it worke'd the way he wanted it, 
it turned out to be wrong. So 
wed start all over. 

But finally we had a working 



SMALL DEER 



131 



model of it and took it out on a 
big bald bluff, several miles up 
the river, where no one ever 
went. I rigged up a timer to a 
switch that would turn it on, 
then after two minutes would re- 
verse the field and send it home 
again. 

We mounted a movie cam- 
era inside the frame that car- 
ried the machine, and we set the 
camera going, then threw the 
timer switch. 

I had my doubts that it would 
work, but it did. It went away 
and stayed for two minutes, then 
came back again. 

When we developed the cam- 
era film, we knew without any 
question the camera had traveled 
back in time. At first there were 
pictures of ourselves, standing 
there and waiting. Then there 
was a little blur, no more than 
a flicker, across a half a dozen 
frames, and the next frames 
showed a mastodon walking 
straight into the camera. A frac- 
tion of a second later his trunk 
jerked up and his ears flared out 
as he wheeled around with clum- 
sy haste and galloped down the 
ridge. 

Every now and then hed 
swing his head around to take a 
look behind him. I imagine that 
our time machine, blossoming 
suddenly out of the ground in 
front of him, scared him out of 
seven years of growth. 



\\Ts were lucky, that was all. 

We could have sent that 
camera back another thousand 
times, perhaps, and never caught 
a mastodon  probably never 
caught a thing. Although we 
would have known it had moved 
in time, for the landscape had 
been different, although not a 
great deal different. But from the 
landscape we could not have told 
if it had gone back in time a hun- 
dred or a thousand years. When 
we saw the mastodon, however, 
we knew wed sent the camera 
back 10,000 years at least. 

I wont bore you with how we 
worked out a lot of problems 
on our second model, or how 
Dennis managed to work out a 
time-meter that we could cali- 
brate to send the machine a speci- 
fic distance into time. Because 
all this is not important. What 
is important is what I found 
when I went into time. 

Ive already told you Id read 
your book about Cretaceous di- 
nosaurs and I liked the entire 
book, but that final chapter about 
the extinction of the dinosaurs 
is the one that really got me. 
Many a time Id lie awake at 
night thinking about all the the- 
ories you wrote about and trying 
to figure out in my own mind 
how it really was. 

So when it was time to get into 
that machine and go, 1 knew 
where I would be headed. 



132 



GALAXY 



Dennis gave me no argument. 
He didnt even want to go. He 
didnt care no more. He never 
was really interested in the time 
machine. All he wanted was to 
prove out his math. Once the 
machine did that, he was through 
with it. 

I worried a lot, going as far as 
I meant to go, about the rising 
or subsidence of the crust. I knew 
that the land around Willow 
Bend had been stable for millions 
of years. Sometime during the 
Cretaceous a sea had crept into 
the interior of the continent, but 
had stopped short of Wisconsin 
and, so far as geologists could de- 
termine, there had been no dis- 
turbances in the state. But I still 
felt uneasy about it. I didnt want 
to come out into the Late Cre- 
taceous with the machine buried 
under a dozen feet of rock or, 
maybe, hanging a dozen feet up 
in the air. 

So I got some heavy steel pipes 
and sunk them six feet into the 
rock on the bald bluff top we 
had used that first time, with 
about ten feet of their length ex- 
tending in the air. I mounted the 
time frame on top of them and 
rigged up a ladder to get in and 
out of it and tied the pipes into 
the time field. 

One morning I packed a lunch 
and filled a canteen with water. 
I dug the old binoculars that had 
been my fathers out of the attic 



and debated whether I should 
take along a gun. All I had was 
a shotgun and I decided not to 
take it. If Id had a rifle, thered 
been no question of my taking 
it, but I didnt have one. I could 
have borrowed one, but I didnt 
want to. Id kept pretty quiet 
about what I was doing and I 
didnt want to start any gossip 
in the village. 

I went up to the bluff top and 
climbed up to the frame and 
set the time-meter for 63j4 mil- 
lion years into the past and then 
I turned her on. I didnt make 
any ceremony out of it. I just 
turned her on and went. 

I told you about the little blur 
in the movie film and thats the 
best way, I suppose, to tell you 
how it was. There was this little 
blur, like a flickering twilight. 
Then it was sunlight once again 
and I was on the bluff top, look- 
ing out across the valley. 

Except it wasnt a bluff top 
any longer, but only a high hill. 
And the valley was not the rug- 
ged, tree-choked, deeply cut val- 
ley I had always known, but a 
great green plain, a wide and 
shallow valley with a wide and 
sluggish river flowing at the far 
side of it. Far to the west I 
could see a shimmer in the sun- 
light, a large lake or sea. But a 
sea, I thought, shouldnt be this 
far east. But there it was, either 



SMALL DEER 



133 



a great lake or a sea  I never 
did determine which. 

And there was something else 
as Vv'ell. I looked down to the 
ground and it was only three feet 
under me. Was I ever glad I 
had used those pipes! 

Looking out across the valley, 
I could see some moving things, 
but they were so far away that 
I could not make them out. So 
I picked up the binoculars and 
jumped down to the ground and 
walked across the hilltop until 
the ground began to slope away. 

I sat down and put the binocu- 
lars to my eyes and worked 
across the valley with them. 

There were dinosaurs out there, 
a whole lot more of them than 
I had expected. They were in 
herds and they were traveling. 
Youd expect that out of any 
dozen herds of them, some of 
them would be feeding, but none 
of them was. All of them were 
moving and it seemed to me there 
was a nervousness in the way 
they moved. Although, I told 
myself, that might be the way 
it was with dinosaurs. 

They all were a long way off, 
even with the glasses, but I could 
make out some of them. There 
w'ere several groups of duckbills, 
waddling along and making 
funny jerky movements with 
their heads. I spotted a couple 
of small herds of thescelosaurs, 
pacing along, with their bodies 

134 



tilted forward. Here and there 
were small groups of triceratops. 
But strangest of all was a large 
herd of brontosaurs, ambling ner- 
vously and gingerly along, as if 
their feet might hurt. And it 
struck me strange, for they were 
a long ways from water and from 
what Id read in your book, and 
in other books, it didnt seem too 
likely they ever wandered too far 
away from water. 

And there were a lot of other 
things that didnt look too much 
like the pictures I had seen in 
books. 

'"T^he whole business had a 
funny feel about it. Could 
it be, I wondered, that I had 
stumbled on some great migra- 
tion, with all the dinosaurs head- 
ing out for some place else? 

I got so interested in watching 
that I was downright careless and 
it was foolish of me. I was in 
another world and there could 
have been all sorts of dangers 
and I should have been watching 
out for them, but I was just sit- 
ting there, flat upon my back- 
side, as if I were at home. 

Suddenly there was a pound- 
ing, as if someone had turned 
loose a piledriver, coming up be- 
hind me and coming very fast. I 
dropped the glasses and twisted 
around and as I did something 
big and tall rushed past me, no 
more than three feet away, so 

GALAXY 



close it almost brushed me. I 
got just a brief impression of it 
as it went past  huge and gray 
and scaly. 

Then, as it went tearing down 
the hill, I saw what it was and 
I had a cold and sinking feeling 
clear down in my gizzard. For I 
had been almost run down by 
the big boy of them all  Tyran- 
nosaurus rex. 

His two great legs worked like 
driving pistons and the light of 
the sun glinted off the wicked, 
recurved claws as his feet pump- 
ed up and down. His tail rode 
low and awkward, but there was 
no awkwardness in the way he 
moved. His monstrous head 
swung from side to side, with 
the great rows of teeth showing 
in the gaping mouth, and he left 
behind him a faint foul smell  
I suppose from the carrion he 
ate. But the big surprise was that 
the wattles hanging underneath 
his throat were a brilliant irri- 
descence  red and green and 
gold and purple, the color of 
them shifting as he swung his 
head. 

I watched him for just a sec- 
ond and then I jumped up and 
headed for the time machine. I 
was more scared than I like to 
think about. I had, I want to 
testify right here, seen enough 
of dinosaurs for a lifetime. 

But I never reached the time 
machine. 



Up over the brow of the hill 
came something else. I say some- 
thing else because I have no idea 
what it really was. Not as big as 
rex, but ten times worse than 
him. 

It was long and sinuous and it 
had a lor of legs and it stood six 
feet high' or so and was a sort of 
sickish pink. Take a caterpillar 
and magnify it until its six feet 
tall, then give it longer legs so 
that it can run instead of crawl 
and hang a death mask dragons 
head upon it and you get a faint 
idea. Just a faint idea. 

I t saw me and swung its head 
toward me and made an 
eager whimpering sound and it 
slid along toward me with a side- 
wheeling gait, like a dog when 
its running out of balance and 
lop-sided. 

I took one look at it and dug 
in my heels and made so sharp 
a turn that I lost my hat. The 
next thing that I knew, I was 
pelting down the hill behind old 
T yrannosaurus. 

And now I saw that myself and 
rex were not the only things that 
were running down the hill. 
Scattered here and there along 
the hillside were other running 
creatures, most of them in small 
groups and herds, although there 
were some singles. Most of them 
were dinosaurs, but there were 
other things as well. 



SMALL DEER 



135 



Im sorry I cant tell you what 
they were, but at that particular 
moment I wasnt what you might 
call an astute observer. I was 
running for my life, as if the 
flames of hell were lapping at 
my heels. 

I looked around a couple of 
times and that sinuous creature 
was still behind me. He wasnt 
gaining on me any, although I 
had the feeling that he could if 
he put his mind to it. Matter of 
fact, he didnt seem to be fol- 
lowing me alone. He was doing a 
lot of weaving back and forth. 
He reminded me of nothing quite 
so much as a faithful farm dog 
bringing in the cattle. But even 
thinking this, it took me a little 
time to realize that was exactly 
what he was  an old farm dog 
bringing in a bunch of assorted 
dinosaurs and one misplaced hu- 
man being. 

At the bottom of the hill I 
looked back again and now that 
I could see the whole slope of the 
hill, I saw that this was a big- 
ger cattle drive than I had imag- 
ined. The entire hill was alive 
with running beasts and behind 
them were a half dozen of the 
pinkish dogs. 

And I knew when I saw this 
that the moving herds Id seen 
out on the valley floor were not 
migratory herds, but they were 
moving because they were being 
driven  that this was a big 



roundup of some sort, with all 
the reptiles and the dinosaurs 
and myself being driven to a 
common center. 

I knew that my life depended 
on getting lost somehow, and be- 
ing left behind. I had to find a 
place to hide and I had to dive 
into this hiding place without be- 
ing seen. Only trouble was there 
seemed no place to hide. The 
valley floor was naked and noth- 
ing bigger than a mouse could 
have hidden there. 

Ahead of me a good-size swale 
rose up from the level floor and 
I went pelting up it. I was run- 
ning out of wind. My breath was 
getting short and I had pains 
throbbing in my chest and I 
knew I couldnt run much farth- 
er. 

I reached the top of the swale 
and started down the reverse 
slope. And there, right in front 
of me, was a bush of some sort, 
three feet high or so, bristling 
with thorns. I was too close to 
it and going too fast to even try 
to dodge it, so I did the only 
thing I could  I jumped over 
it. 

But on the other side there 
was no solid ground. There was, 
instead, a hole. I caught just a 
glimpse of it and tried to jerk 
my body to one side, and then 
I was falling in the hole. 

It wasnt much bigger than I 



136 



GALAXY 



was. It bumped me as I fell and 
I picked up some bruises, then 
landed with a jolt. The fall 
knocked the breath out of me 
and I was doubled over, with my 
arms wrapped about my belly. 

My breath came slowly back 
and the pain subsided and I was 
able to take a look at where I 
was. 

The hole was some three feet 
in diameter and perhaps as much 
as seven deep. It slanted slightly 
toward the forefront of the slope 
and its sides were worn smooth. 
A thin trickle of dirt ran down 
from the edge of it, soil that I 
had loosened and dislodged when 
I had hit the hole. And about half- 
way up was a cluster of small 
rocks, the largest of them about 
the size of a human head, pro- 
jecting more than half their 
width out of the wall. I thought, 
idly, as I looked at them, that 
some day theyd come loose and 
drop into the hole. And at the 
thought I squirmed around a 
little to one side, so that if they 
took a notion to fall Id not be 
in the line of fire. 

Looking down, I saw that Id 
not fallen to the bottom of the 
hole, for the hole went on, deep- 
er in the ground. I had come to 
rest at a point where the hole 
curved sharply, to angle back 
beneath the swale top. 

I hadnt noticed it at first, I 
suppose because I had been too 



shook up, but now I became 
aware of a musky smell. Not an 
overpowering odor, but a sort of 
scent  faintly animal, although 
not quite animal. 

A smooth-sided hole and a 
musky smell  there could be no 
other answer: I had fallen not 
into just an ordinary hole, but 
into a burrow of some sort. And 
it must be the burrow of quite 
an animal, I thought, to be the 
size it was. It would have taken 
something with hefty claws, in- 
deed, to have dug this sort of 
burrow. 

And even as I thought it, I 
heard the rattling and the scrab- 
bling of something coming up the 
burrow, no doubt coming up to 
find out what was going on. 

I did some scrabbling myself. I 
didnt waste no time. But 
about three feet up I slipped. I 
grabbed for the top of the hole, 
but my fingers slid tnrough the 
sandy soil and I couldnt get a 
grip. I shot out my feet and stop- 
ped my slide short of the bottom 
of the hole. And there I was, with 
my back against one side of the 
hole and my feet braced against 
the other, hanging there, half- 
way up the burrow. 

While all the time below me 
the scrabbling and the clicking 
sounds continued. The thing, 
whatever it might be, was getting 
closer, and it was coming fast. 



SMALL DEER 



137 



Right in front of me was the 
nest of rocks sticking from the 
wall. I reached out and grabbed 
the biggest one and jerked and 
it came loose. It was heavier than 
I had figured it would be and I 
almost dropped it, but managed 
to hang on. 

A snout came out of the curve 
in the burrow and thrust itself 
quickly upward in a grabbing 
motion. The jaws opened up and 
they almost filled the burrow 
and they were filled with sharp 
and wicked teeth. 

I didnt think. I didnt plan. 
What I did was instinct, I drop- 
ped the rock between my spread- 
out legs straight down into that 
gaping maw. It was a heavy rock 
and it dropped four feet or so 
and went straight between the 
teeth, down into the blackness of 
the throat. When it hit it splash- 
ed and the paws snapped shut 
and the creature backed away. 

How I did it, I dont know, but 
I got out of the hole. I clawed 
and kicked against the wall and 
heaved my body up and rolled 
out of the' hole onto the naked 
hillside. 

Naked, that is, except for the 
bush with 'the inch-long thorns, 
the one that Id jumped over be- 
fore i fell into the burrow. It 
was the only cover that there 
was and I made for the upper 
side of it, for by now, I figured, 
the big cattle drive had gone 



past me and if I could get the 
bush between myself and the 
valley side of the swale, ! might 
have a chance. Otherwise, sure 
as hell, one of those dogs would 
see me and would come out to 
bring me in. 

For a while there was no ques- 
tions that they were dinosaur 
herders, they probably couldnt 
tell the difference betv/een me 
and a dinosaur. 1 was ali've and 
could run and that would qualify 
me. 

There was always the chance, 
of course, that the owner of the 
burrow would come swarming 
out, and if he did I couldnt stay 
behind the bush. But I rather 
doubted hed be coming out, not 
right away, at least. It would 
take him a while to get that stone 
out of his throat. 

I crouched behind the bush and 
the sun was hot upon my 
back and, peering 'through the 
branches, I could see, far out on 
the valley floor, the great herd 
of milling beasts. All of them 
had been driven together and 
there they were, running in a 
knotted circle, while outside the 
circle prowled the pinkish dogs 
and something else as well  
what appeared to be men driv- 
ing tiny cars. The cars and men 
were all of the same color, ,-i sort 
of greenish gray, and the two of 
them, the cars and men, seemed 



138 



GALAXY 



to be a single organism. The men 
didnt seem to be sitting in the 
cars; they looked as if they grew 
out of the cars, as if they and the 
cars were one. And while the 
cars went zipping along, they 
appeared to have no wheels. It 
was hard to tell, but they seemed 
to travel with the bottom of them 
flat upon the ground, like a snail 
would travel, and as they trav- 
elled, they rippled, as if the body 
of the car were some sort of flow- 
ing muscle. 

1 crouched there watching and 
now. for the first time, I had a 
chance to think about it, to try 
to figure out what was going on. 
I had come here, across more 
than sixty million years, to see 
some dinosaurs, and I sure was 
seeing them, but under what you 
might say were peculiar circum- 
stances. The dinosaurs fit, all 
right. They looked mostly like 
the way they looked in books, 
but the dogs and car-men were 
something else again. They were 
distinctly out of place. 

The dogs v/ere pacing back and 
forth, sliding along in their sinu- 
ous fashion, and the car-men 
were zipping back and forth, and 
every once in a while one of the 
beasts would break out of the 
circle and the minute that it did, 
a half dozen dogs and a couple 
of car-men would race to inter- 
cept it and drive it back again. 

The circle of beasts must have 



had roughly, a diameter of a 
mile or more  a mile of milling, 
frightened creatures. A lot of pal- 
eontologists have wondered 
whether dinosaurs had any voice 
and I can tell you that they did. 
They were squealing and roaring 
and quacking and there were 
some of them that hooted  I 
think it was the duckbills hoot- 
ing, but I cant be sure 

Then, all at once, there was 
another sound, a sort of flutter- 
ing roar that seemed to be com- 
ing from the sky. I looked up 
quickly and I saw them coming 
down  a dozen or so spaceships, 
they couldnt have been anything 
but spaceships. They came down 
rather fast and they didnt seem 
too big and there were tails of 
thin, blue flame flickering at 
their bases. Not the billowing 
clouds of flame and smoke that 
our rockets have, but just a thin 
blue flicker. 

For a minute it looked like 
one of them would land on top 
of me, but then I saw that it was 
too far out. It missed me, mat- 
ter of fact, a good two miles or 
so. It and the others sat down 
in a ring around the milling herd 
out in the valley. 

I should have known what 
would happen out there. It 
was the simplest explanation one 
could think of and it was logical. 
I think, maybe, way deep down. 



SMALL DEER 



139 



I did know, but my surface mind 
had pushed it away because it 
was too matter-of-fact and too 
ordinary. 

Thin snouts spouted from the 
ships and purple fire curled mist- 
ily at the muzzle of those snouts 
and the dinosaurs went down in 
a fighting, frightened, squealing 
mass. Thin trickles of vapor 
drifted upward from the snouts 
and out in the center of the circle 
lay that heap of dead and dying 
dinosaurs, all those thousands of 
dinosaurs piled in death. 

It is a simple thing to tell, of 
course, but it was a terrible thing 
to see. I crouched there behind 
the bush, sickened at the sight, 
startled by the silence when all 
the screaming and the squealing 
and the hooting ceased. And 
shaken, too  not by what shakes 
me now as I write this letter, but 
shaken by the knowledge that 
something from outside could do 
this to the earth. 

For they were from outside. It 
wasnt just the spaceships, but 
those pinkish dogs and gray- 
green car-men which were not 
cars and men, but a single organ- 
ism, were not things cf earth, 
could not be things of earth. 

I crept back from the bush, 
keeping low in hope that the 
bush would screen me from the 
things down in the valley until I 
reached the swale top. One of 
the dogs swung around and look- 



ed my way and I froze, and after 
a time he looked away. 

Then I was over the top of the 
swale and heading back toward 
the time machine. But half way 
down the slope, I turned around 
and came back again, crawling 
on my belly, squirming to the 
hilltop to have another look. 

It was a look Ill not forget. 

The dogs and car-men had 
swarmed in upon the heap of 
dead dinosaurs, and some cf the 
cars already v.'ere crawling back 
toward the grounded spaceships, 
which had let down ramps. The 
cars were moving slowly, for 
they were heavily loaded and the 
loads they carried were neatly 
butchered hams and racks of 
ribs. 

And in the sky there was a 
muttering and I looked up to see 
yet other spaceships coming 
down  the little transport ships 
that would carry this cargo of 
fresh meat up to another larger 
ship that waited overhead. 

It was then I turned and ran. 

I reached the top of the hill 
and piled into the time machine 
and set it at zero and came 
home. I didnt even stop to hunt 
for the binoculars Id dropped. 

A nd now that I am home, Im 
not going back again. Im 
not going anywhere in that time 
machine. Im afraid of what I 
might find any place I go. If 



140 



GALAXY 



Wyalusing College has any need 
of it, Ill give them the time ma- 
chine. 

But thats not why I wrote. 

There is no doubt in my mind 
what happened to the dinosaurs, 
why they became extinct. They 
were killed off and butchered 
and hauled away, to some other 
planet, perhaps many light years 
distant, by a race which looked 
upon the earth as a cattle range 
 a planet that could supply a 
vast amount of cheap protein. 

But that, you say, happened 
more than sixty million years 
ago. This race did once exist. But 
in sixty million years it would 
almost certainly have changed its 
ways or drifted off in its hunting 
to some other sector of the gal- 
axy, or, perhaps, have become 
extinct, like the dinosaurs. 

But I dont think so. I dont 
think any of those things hap- 
pened. I think theyre still 
around. I think earth may be 
only one of many planets which 
supply their food. 

And Ill tell you why I think 
so. They were back on earth 
again, Im sure, some 10,000 or 
1 1 ,000 years ago, when they 
killed off the mammoth and the 
mastodon, the giant bison, the 
great cave bear and the sabre- 
tooth and a lot of other things. 
Oh, yes, I know they missed Af- 
rica. They never touc.hed the big 
game there. Maybe, after wiping 



out the dinosaurs, they learned 
their lesson, and left Africa for 
breeding stock. 

And now I come to the point 
of this letter, the thing that has 
me worried. 

Today there are just a few less 
than three billion of us humans 
in the world. By the year 2,000 
tliere may be as many as six bil- 
lion of us. 

Were pretty small, of course, 
and these things went in for ton- 
nage, for dinosaurs and mastodon 
and such. But there are so many 
of us! Small as we are, we may 
be getting to the point where 
well be worth their while. 

CLIFFORD D. SIMAK. 




Prevent heartbreak and hunger 
across the world  each dollar 
sends a Food Crusade package 
through CARE, New York 10016. 



SMALL DEER 



141 




^'T^he hardcover science-fiction 
-* books of today are of course 
published by the same people 
who publish the straight fiction 
and mysteries and westerns  
Doubleday, Simon 8b Schuster 
and so forth. This wasnt always 
so; it didnt begin to be so until 
about the time, fifteen years ago, 
when this magazines first issue 
began a similarly meaningful 
revolution on the newsstands. In 
1950, the biggest names in sf 
books  almost the only names  
were Arkham House, Fantasy 
Press, F.P.C.I., Gnome Press, 
Hadley, Prime Press and Shasta. 
Some of them were on their way 
out, but these were isolated in- 
firmities: a commercially fool- 
ish editorial policy in one in- 
stance, the publishers personal 
circumstances in another. As a 
group they were promising, 



though they were essentially 
one-man operations started by 
people who had scraped together 
a little capital or credit. In some 
hope of profit, they were in the 
business of reprinting what each 
personally considered the best 
magazine science fiction pub- 
lished to that date. 

What they produced was var- 
ious. It varied from one com- 
panys systematic resurrection of 
every big name undermined by 
the new techniques of the 1940s 
Astounding, through Hadleys 
editions of such interesting but 
idiosyncratic pieces as L. Ron 
Hubbards Final Blackout, to 
Arkham Houses beautifully 
made volumes not only of How- 
ard Phillips Lovecraft but of 
A. E. van Vogts Sian and Ray 
Bradburys first and best collec- 
tion, Dark Carnival. 



142 



They did most of their business 
by mail order; their ads were 
column inches in the prozines, 
mimeographed pages in the fan- 
zines. But in any largish city you 
could usually find one bookstore 
which was not above stocking one 
copy each for the nut trade, and 
here and there you could find 
booksellers who boasted that 
they specialized in it. 

1950 was about the time when 
book review columns became reg- 
ular features in the prozines. Be- 
fore that, reviews, like books, 
had been occasional pieces. They 
had run as fillers at the bottoms 
of pages short on story text, and 
they were often obviously too 
thrilled at the thought that any- 
thing at all had found its way 
into boards. By 1950, the volume 
had not only gotten high enough 
to justify regular columns, it 
had gotten high enough to justify 
a nice cathartic bent of expres- 
sion when a bad one came in, be- 
cause the bad ones were in hope- 
less contrast to the good ones. 

C ' od grant that such a luxuriant 
' time will never again come 
to science fiction book publish- 
ing. The great board of top- 
rank material waiting to be put 
into books was the bittersweet re- 
sult of persistent neglect. Writers 
had lived, written and died with- 
out ever seeing permanent pub- 
lication. Most of them were not 



specially conscious of great de- 
privation in this area, however 
 not very many people knew 
the area existed. It was entirely 
possible to be a science-fiction 
fan in 1945 and not realize that 
there had been a Golden Age 
just before World War II; it was 
only when these books began 
coming out that the shape and 
nature of that work became fully 
apparent. 

I would not want you to think 
that I believe some cosmic switch 
had clicked over in 1939 and 
then back in 1944. Neither is it 
true that between these arbi- 
trary dates Astounding Science 
Fiction published seventy-two 
issues of solid immortal litera- 
ture while none of its competi- 
tors did a thing but move in 
place. What Astounding did do, 
over a period of years, was to 
develop and, until 1950, keep 
writers who fairly often wrote a 
certain broad type of story well. 
It was a type of story which was 
better received by articulate sci- 
ence-fiction readers of those days 
than was any other type of story; 
those same readers were now 
ready to buy these same stories 
again in book form, and it so hap- 
pened that a good number of peo- 
ple who had never read that kind 
of science fiction before were able 
to share their taste. 

The ASF Golden Age in sci- 
ence fiction had been slightly an- 



GALAXY BOOKSHELF 



143 



ticipated by a similar phenome- 
non in crime fiction, with Dashiell 
Hammett and Raymond Chan- 
dler, among others, emerging 
from the crumbled pages of Black 
Mask. Apparently something just 
before the War acted to create 
pulp writers who were willing to 
break out of the post-World War 
I shell of neverland cliches which 
persisted in the pulps until the 
middle of the 1930s. It may have 
been an echo of the same tough 
attitude toward life that had 
produced Hemingway and Stein- 
beck in the mainstream some- 
what earlier. Crime stories in the 
new mode had been getting ser- 
ious book publishing attention 
all during World War II. Now 
it was perhaps science fictions 
turn. The material was there. The 
new publishers picked it up and 
made books of it. 

Fantasy Press went back a lit- 
tle farther, to publish the early 
E.E. Smith and Stanley Wein- 
baum as well as other forerun- 
ners of modern science fiction 
as these same book publishers 
now proceeded to define it, creat- 
ing sharp distinctions from the 
past, and from Flash Gordon, 
simply by running full notices of 
previous publication and thus 
making it clear where the good 
 the most readable  material 
had come from. Centering their 
attention exactly on the Camp- 
bellian writers were Gnome Press 



and Shasta; while Shasta brought 
out Heinleins Future History se- 
ries, for example. Gnome was 
busy doing Asimovs Foundation 
stories. Arkham House, Sian 
aside, was meanwhile tending 
toward selections from such 
fantasy magazines as Weird 
Tales and Unknown, which had 
had little golden ages of their 
own and which Fantasy Presss 
program also included. Prime 
Press did a little of both, in- 
cluding collections by Lester del 
Rey ( . .And Some Were Hu- 
man) and Theodore Sturgeon 
{Without Sorcery) which split 
their sources mainly between As- 
founding and Unknown, and by 
George O. Smith (Fenus Equila- 
teral) which was without peer 
as an example of ASF wiring-dia- 
gram fiction. Shasta brought out 
the Don A. Stuart stories {Who 
Goes There?, Cloak of Aesir), 
and Gnome did Van Vogts The 
Mixed Men and Henry Kuttners 
Gallegher stories {Robots Have 
No Tails, by Lewis Padgett). 

In other words, in the few 
years between the end of the war 
and the earliest 1950s, these var- 
ious people with their varied re- 
sources brought out the books 
which are still the liver and 
lights of any permanent collec- 
tion of good science fiction. Ran- 
dom House had issued its legen- 
dary Healy-McComas anthology, 
Adventures in Time and Space, 



144 



GALAXY 



and Crown had brought out Groff 
Conklins A Treasury of Science 
Fiction, but Gnome had counter- 
ed with Martin Greenbergs Men 
Against the Stars, an entry fully 
qualified to run in that field. 

If it hadnt been for the houses 
listed in Paragraph One of this 
necessarily breathless history, 
grown up science fiction might 
have taken years to find a per- 
manent place in literature via 
the library catalogues. With the 
few exceptions mentioned imme- 
diately above, the established 
major houses hadnt touched 
anything but Verne and Wells in 
years, the only significant war- 
time exceptions being Poc^ets 
original paperback, The Pocket 
Book of Science Fiction, and Vik- 
ings Portable Novels oj Science. 
Doth of these had been edited 
and one assumes fought into life 
by Donald Wollheim, who has 
gone on to do his impressive job 
of making bricks without stnaw 
for Ace paperbacks. He, Healy 
and McComas, Groff Conklin 
and a few others might eventual- 
ly have succeeded by applying 
unremitting pressure over a 
long period of time. The little 
specialist houses, operating out 
of lofts, book stores and their 
owners basements, cut that time 
dramatically short. They made 
the 1950s into boom year . 
from which they themselves 
would draw little but disaster. 



T)y 1951, these people had ac- 
complished two major things, 
both suicidal. They had exhaust- 
ed the supply of easily found, 
high-quality reprints from the 
magazines, and they had estab- 
lished the financial value of the 
sf book market. They had gotten 
to that point because you can 
succeed with almost any sensible 
small venture in publishing as 
long as youre not doing some- 
thing the potential major com- 
petitors want to do as well. At 
that point, the first Science Fic- 
tion Book Club had appeared on 
the back cover of a prozine. Ex- 
cept for differences of detail, it 
looked and read exactly like its 
sister ads for the Detective Book 
Club, which had been riding the 
back covers of the crime maga- 
zines for years. Merchandising 
had come to the business of pub- 
lishing sf books for profit, and 
the incidence of major company 
names on new sf titles had be- 
gun to rise sharply. 

A major publishing house has, 
by definition, the equipment 
needed to be a major publisher 
 a staff of editorial specialists, 
a production staff which does 
nothing all day but buy supplies 
and services having to do with 
publishing and a sales staff which 
can consist of hundreds of speci- 
alists, some of them out on the 
road calling on bookstore owners 
they have known for years and 

145 



GALAXY BOOKSHELF 



others sitting home and writing 
punchy brochure copy. This is 
what these people do for a living. 
They have been trained for it un- 
der the impetus of believing that 
this is all they can do for a liv- 
ing. They are paid to do their 
one thing at least as well as their 
opposite numbers at the next ma- 
jor house. With this sort of or- 
ganization, it is possible to pro- 
duce a million copies of some- 
thing that may look and be frac- 
tionally better than the work of 
one busy man working for him- 
self. If you have a hundred such 
specialists, they can produce, say, 
ten times as many things to make 
a million copies of. 

Once such a major organization 
has been put in train, it is com- 
mitted by the inertia of sched- 
ules and capital investment. The 
sight of a major publishing com- 
pany winding up to give birth 
to a new program is so impres- 
sive that few of its rivals can 
restrain themselves from follow- 
ing suit. Once the herd has been 
set in motion it must, by the 
nature of the beast, proceed along 
the line of least resistance for an 
indefinite period of time, leaving 
nothing in its wake but a stubble 
of grasses cropped too short to 
sustain life. 

fn the area of wholesale book- 
JL selling, the brief contention 
was thus between the specialists 

146 



in science fiction and the spe- 
cialists in publishing. In the area 
of simple packaging  of pro- 
ducing at a profit a book which 
appears to be worth the retail 
customers money  the contest 
was only a little longer in the 
drawing out. It was in fact ex- 
tended past its natural run by 
something like a happenstance. 
The merchandising machinery 
having gotten turned on, the var- 
ious sales organizations sponsor- 
ed by the major publishers im- 
mediately needed more product 
than the publishers themselves 
were yet able to furnish. So for 
a little while the small houses 
were able to supply copies to the 
book club operations owned more 
or less by their direct competitors. 
Thus they acquired a little more 
money to operate on, at the same 
time that their choice of produc- 
tion standards was sharply nar- 
rowed to the more expensive 
bands of the book-making spec- 
trum. 

What this meant for the retail 
customers was that more con- 
ventional-looking science fiction 
books in far greater quantities 
had become available. Shopping 
for books became considerably 
more convenient. Book prices 
were reduced, in several senses; 
over the short terms, there was 
the benefit of having the speci- 
alist houses throw their stocks 
on the cut-rate market in an 



GALAXY 



effort to get hold of additional 
working capital or simply to bail 
out. Over the long term, book 
prices were reduced (not abso- 
lutely, but relative to the still 
rising cost of production) by the 
combination of high-volume sales 
and production economies of 
which only major publishers are 
capable. 

In fact, the only place the sf 
book-reading public lost anything 
tangible at all was one from 
which the small publishers could 
not have rescued them, but from 
which the big publishers could. 
That was in the paucity of re- 
maining publishable book-length 
material. The result was that the 
middle 1950s v/ere bad years for 
quality, and looked worse by 
comparison to the immediate 
past. 

The middle 1950s were the 
years in which we got the 
novels pasted together from se- 
ries short stories, the science fic- 
tion by outside writers who had 
obviously seen a monster movie 
once and the unfortunate experi- 
ments in hapless antiquarianism 
reminiscent of that pioneering 
California company which had 
staked its all on Ralph Milne 
Farley. 

These were the years in which 
knowledgeable critics lambasted 
the major companies day and 
night. If Gnome Press had been 
able to bring out Isaac Asimovs 

GALAXY BOOKSHELF 



I, Robot, why in Heavens name 
couldnt a giant outfit like Dou- 
bleday do better than Nelson 
Bonds Lancelot Biggs series dis- 
guised as a novel? Answer, Dou- 
bleday wasnt about to do I, Ro- 
bot  yet. Gnomes excellently 
manufactured edition, with its 
flossy Cartier jacket making it 
look exactly like a big-time book, 
was still very much on sale. Dou- 
bleday would of course get to 
it in the course of time, but mean- 
while there was Max Ehrlichs 
The Big Eye, and that was 
science fiction too. You could tell 
by the rocket on the title page. 

I t wasnt all bad. Gnomes City, 
by Clifford Simak, was the 
outstanding example of a pasteup 
that had been begging to be done. 
Doubledays The Martian Chro- 
nicles dates from that time  a 
beautiful Bradbury collection 
which owes part of its charm to 
the loose connecting passages be- 
tween stories, which may be the 
fragile vestiges of earlier plans 
to make a novel. Simon 85 
Schuster did take the bit in its 
teeth and publish an edition 
of Sian. Grossett 85 Dunlap 
came out with a mass-priced 
edition of Henry Kuttners Fury. 
Frederick Fell, hitherto known 
as the promulgator of Oscar J. 
Friends The Kid from Mars  
which is not quite as bad as its 
title  began publishing the 

147 



Bleiler-Dikty annual best col- 
lections of magazine stories, 
whic/i served the function of pro- 
viding the cinderblock base for 
Judith Merril to later build big- 
ger and better for Simon 86 
Schuster and Dell. And Twayne, 
another small but nevertheless 
full-scale publisher wh., hoped to 
ride up among the majors on the 
strength of this new boom, did 
something very interesting with 
its Triplet series, fostered by 
Fletcher Pratt and Dr. John D. 
Clark. 

These were anthologies of 
three novellas each by three ma- 
jor sf writers, who were given a 
loose outline of a basic story 
problem and a detailed descrip- 
tion of the solar system in which 
it was to occur, each writer then 
going his own way as he saw fit. 
This was one attempt to create 
books. With all the will and bud- 
get in the world, the science-fic- 
tion magazines of that time could 
only supply the best of the new 
gout of wordage the book pub- 
lishers now needed as they jock- 
eyed for control of the market. 
They couldnt supply all of it, by 
a long shot. 

Perforce, the book publishers 
had to be willing to pay enough 
for original material so that good 
writers could be induced to oc- 
casionally forego the magazines 
as a primary market 

No publisher in the world ever 



pays more than he has to, but the 
major publishers have people 
trained to pay that minimum 
with checks drawn on impres- 
sive banks, and with cheerily 
mesmerrhetic references to the 
freemasonry of the arts. In this 
case the book publishers were not 
only broadening the primary 
market for original sf, they were 
now applying the coup de grace 
to the little specialists, as well as 
.shaking off the coattail riders in 
their own ranks. 

Twayne was one oi the com- 
panies which dropped out of the 
picture. But its program left 
some significant orphans. Among 
the ultimate results of Fletcher 
Pratts brainchild was James 
Blishs Hugo-winning A Case oj 
Conscience, which ran as a long 
one-parter in If before expanding 
up to its prize book length. Two 
other Twayne stories, an Asimov 
and a Poul Anderson, appeared 
as serials in Astounding. In its 
own leflhanded way, this was the 
first major case of important 
work being fed from a book pub- 
lisher into the magazines  a 
complete reversal of the estab- 
lished precedence. 

A t about this same time, two 

^ other interesting things hap- 
pened. 

A publisher of paperback 
originals got on the stands with 
his edition of a middling-impor- 



148 



GALAXY 



tant novel before it had finished 
running as a serial in Astound- 
ing. And Doubleday published 
Cyril Kornbluths Takeoff, a ma- 
jor novel by a major magazine 
writer, which had seen no maga- 
zine publication at all. 

After the inevitable stumbling 
start, the big book houses were 
getting their programs into full 
flight. In every other impor- 
tant field of magazine fiction, 
most of the long serials had in 
fact been already under contract 
as books. That had now become 
the situation in science fiction, as 
well, and with various ups and 
downs, that is the situation today. 
In all, it took the major houses 
about five years, from 1950 to 
1955, to make it so. 

After ten years, this pendulum 
may now be getting ready to 
swing back the other v/ay. Too 
many new (novels) are not form- 
er magazine serials  however 
arrived at  but puffed-up nove- 
lettes. Some of them were books 
all along, cut down for magazine 
use. But by far the greater per- 
centage are not  they are pad- 
ded, patched together or pub- 
lished in a design form that 
makes a lousy forty thousand 
words stretch across too many 
pages which are mostly margin 
and elephantiasical type. They 
are sometimes written by third- 
rate writers who are being over- 
paid in compensation for missing 

GALAXY BOOKSHELF 



the apprenticeship that magazine 
work forces on its steady practi- 
tioners. These flat souffles are 
in turn subjected to the atten- 
tions of blurb writers and sales 
promotion directors who des- 
cribe and package them to be 
more attractive and rewarding 
than they really are. 

It is my fervent hope that 
these easy promises will have 
their effect; that the second or 
third time the customer is in- 
duced to part with four dollars 
for a two-dollar experience, a 
certain chill will settle over the 
romance. 

In looking over the titles pro- 
duced by the pioneers of 1950  
not all of whom were honest 
men with the look of far hori- 
zons in their eyes, and some of 
whom rooked their customers 
and writers unmercifully, some- 
times from sheer naivete  one 
is struck by how odd a profession- 
al production man for, say, Big- 
gers 8s Better & Sons Co. would 
find them. He might forgive them 
for the early hardcover book 
which was bound in limp lea::iier 
by the only bindery in town and 
looks exactly like a bible, or for 
the jobs which were obviously 
done on flatbed weekly newspa- 
per presses. He might under- 
stand that the publishers were 
limited in their choices of pro- 
duction methods and sources of 
supply for such things as paper 

149 



and binding cloth. He, a book 
designer and a professional pack- 
et copywriter might have the 
patience to understand that the 
publishers of these books had to 
handle those functions them- 
selves and could not really be 
faulted for not having as much 
esthetic sense or writing ability 
as they had editorial judgment 
. 01 whatever it was they had. 

It is after all a truism in big- 
time publishing that talent is ex- 
actly as deep as frosted glass par- 
tition. What would puzzle and 
dismay the production man would 
be the frequent appearance of 
expensive interior halftone illus- 
strations  often done in the 
publishers best self-taught style 
 tipped in on expensive en- 
ameled stock; the use of opulent 
text papers, of foundry type, of 
cut initials, of attempts at full- 
color reproduction of jacket de- 
signs which were often even 
worse than the interior illustra- 
tions. 

These were struggling people. 
They typed their own invoices, 
wrapped their own product and 
stood in line at the post office 
to mail it, walking back to their 
thirty-dollar-a-month offices with 
sheafs of stamps sticking out of 
their shirt pockets. Almost to a 
man, they thought they could 
solve problems that have wreck- 
ed the careers of professional 
specialists, and almost to a man 

150 



they didnt even realize they had 
failed. They didnt even know, 
beyond a vague sense of some- 
thing not quite right, why their 
books felt harder to read than a 
similar text composed and de- 
signed by a man drawing fifteen 
grand a year from Biggers Sa Bet- 
ter  mostly for having on file 
the phone numbers of all the dis- 
play type houses in town. 

They werent all like that, of 
course. The bigger outfits, like 
Gnome and Shasta, farmed out 
most of these problems to com- 
mercial book manufacturers. Ark- 
ham House and Fantasy Press 
books are distinguishable from 
todays commercial products by 
the simple fact that they are 
among the best-looking items in 
your library. But there is not one 
in which the careful eye will not 
detect some trace of ingenuous- 
ness, some certain sign that the 
publisher concerned was copying 
what he remembered from the 
books of his youth  the J. Al- 
len St. John illustrations in his 
pre-War Grossett 8e Dunlap Tar- 
zan books, the creamy paper of 
the days when pulp forests were 
not yet the property of news- 
paper cartels. 

These are the things that catch 
the eye as one leafs through one 
of these productions. They are 
the signs of love, dreams and 
spirit, even among the scoundrels. 

 ALGIS BUDRYS 



GALAXY 



BY FRITZ LEIBER 



They were fearing our world 
down atour. ^ i,:. Too ban' they 

weren't tearing us down tool 



tt^"T^hey dont build slums like 
they used to, VVhitey 
Edwards told me, reaching up 
for a loose corner of the flexo 
and pulling it down to prove his 
point. It domed springily over 
our dreg-bottomed coffee cups, 
revealing in the hidden space 
behind it the limp multicolored 
spaghetti of the utilities piping: 
gas, water, metered syntho-milk, 
sewage, coaxed TV, med-mist, 
Musik, robo-talk, robo-juice, 
tele, vele, elec, gelec, and such. 
Few of them running fat with 
their peculiar contributions to 
the good life, I judged. 

That may be so, I answer- 



ed, slapping aside the dodderers 
hands and thumbing the blue 
elastic panel back in place with 
a fast rub along its adhesive 
edge. Again it decently covered 
the flaccid tangle of what looked 
like rainbow-hued sheeps gut 
and rubber unmentionables. But 
they built Ma like a bull and 
shell gore and trample you if 
she finds you tearing down her 
kitchen. Its bad enough what 
the giant centipedes are doing. 
The jumbo TV, jammed be- 
tween sink and fridge flickered 
weak and ghostly. A gaggle of 
five-job wives and eight-job men 
were having a closed-end dis- 




cussion of everything in creation 
on the executive patio edge of 
a swimming pool big enough to 
hide a space-to-seabottom cruis- 
er. Their sweet eldritch cackle 
was unintelligible, but their state 
of undress was a slight counter- 
irritant to boredom. 

Whitey Edwards sighed, not 
looking at these suburban god- 
desses, but squinting his rheumy 
eyes against the Monday sun 
coming up like doom over the 
dusty flats between Beatsville 
and the Henleys happy if fragile 
little family castle. Earths spot- 
ted, spitting, seething star shot 
its angry rays under the great 
awning rigged in front of our 
windows and door. 

Once, the old boy said, shak- 
ing the head -topping that gave 
him his name, they built slums 
solid with steel beams and heavy 
lath and great bloody pipes of 
iron and tile and lead that made 
em think twice before they tore 
em down. But now . . He 
sighed his wheezy grief. Whiteyd 
used to be a con-and-destruc- 
tion worker decades back, be- 
fore the robots took that over, 
before I was born. 

The TV zoomered in on a 
taut little job in bolero jacket 
and loincloth. The sound clear- 
ed for her fast happy words 
. caring for this pool put 
my husband and I in the pool- 
counselor raquette . and died. 



I started to tell Whitey 1 had 
even more current job-sorrows 
than his. Since Thursday Id 
been terminated from my street- 
smilers job for competing with 
the psychiatrists, robot and hu- 
man, and for all I know with 
the giant centipedes. Just then 
my brother Dick erupted from 
the bed-closets, throwing clothes 
over his sallow nakedness like a 
Gypsy escaping from a Nazi gas 
chamber  or as if he were a 
six-job man at least and not a 
sprint-in-the-gutter one- jobber. 
And with that job only since 
Friday night after being three 
weeks on probationary relief. 

I called sweetly at him, Are 
you scared a customer vi/ill put 
a gush of quarters into one of 
your metal bandits with her own 
little pinkies if youre a minute 
late? 

Dick scowled, gyrating around 
a stubborn trouser leg. Dont 
you worry, Dickie, I kejit on. 
All the women I illicitly psyched 
were as nervous of machinery as 
sex, they wanted a man to do it 
for them. 

Society, graciously, used to let 
people work vending and other 
coin - operated machines, like 
laundromats. But now, like laun- 
dromats too, you have to pay 
an attendant to do it for you  
because machines are tempera- 
mental and individual enterprise 
is almost as holy as money and 



152 



GALAXY 



anyway, there arent enough jobs 
to go around more than two or 
three times. 

Dick groggled something at me 
and got the door open, all set 
for a spring-heel take-off. But 
there in his way was a tiny 
man, dressed like a respectable 
beetle, with dimpled fist raised 
to knock. He had glasses with 
zoomer lenses; silver antennae 
quivered out of his gray hat; a 
flat black belly-box was his ven- 
tral carapace. He looked around, 
especially at the cluttered floor, 
as if we were a touch unsavory, 
but he held his ground. 

As Dick paused at this col- 
eopterous apparition, Ma came 
charging out of the bed-closets, 
red in the face and black was 
the rest of her. She grappled 
Dick around the elbows and roar- 
ed, Stop! No son of mine is 
going out to give battle to the 
21st Century on an empty stom- 
ach. Grabbing a quarter orange 
she shoved it between his teeth 
like a boxers mouthpiece and 
then snatching this way and that 
she slammed a sandwich in his 
one hand and a cup in the other 
and on the next time around 
poured it steaming full. 

"VTo one can deny that Ma 

^ stands squarely in back of 
her four sons, like the manager 
of a quartet of fistic champions, 
conscious of our genius and de- 



termined that it get recognition 
in the form of seven- or eight - 
job careers. Though at the mo- 
ment Dick was the only one of 
us with any job at all, except 
for Tom, who lives away with his 
wife and two kids. But obstruc- 
tions and set-backs never daunt 
Ma. Its not the money shes 
after, mostly, its the glory of 
the House of Henley pitted 
against the whole bloody world. 

Pricked by tender filial warmth 
I eyed her  a murderous son- 
punishing behemoth but my 
blessed mother  while Whitey 
gave her an unseen wave. Hes 
an old admirer she tolerates ever 
since Pa recognized her superior 
nuclear power and died. 

Dick bit out and swallowed 
the meat of the orange and ton- 
gued aside the peel so as to yell 
that the coffee was burning his 
hand and what would it do to 
his throat? Ma ripped the fridge 
open against the pull of the 
great spring Id fixed outside to 
keep it shut since the latch 
broke. She whisked out an ice- 
cube and tucked it in Dicks cup. 
The fridge door thudded shut 
and the spring whirred like a 
rattlesnake about to jump loose 
and strike, but it didnt. 

Then Dick gulped his coffee 
while Ma held him and screech- 
ed in his ear about using lunch 
hour to scout for a second job 
and not stalk girls. When hed 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



153 



finished his drink, she gagged 
him with his sandwich and let 
him go. 

The beetle-man dodged aside. 
Dick took off with a straight- 
line velocity that would have 
broken his neck and scattered 
his bones if wed still been living 
on the twentieth floor and not 
in this ground-level flat they 
tricked us into exchanging for. 

The TV blinked and  presto 
 there was a soldierly file of 
eight-job men (tabbed for that 
by the digit on their left shoul- 
der) single-footing with pleasant 
monotony past the golden plas- 
tic statue of a twelve- jobber. 
Each as he reached screen-cen- 
ter turned head and shouted an 
inaudible by optimistic some- 
thing at me and bared all his 
perfectly tended teeth in a daz- 
zling grin. 

I breathed a happy sigh and 
got set for a spell of quiet 
 at least until the centipedes 
decided to start scuttling  but 
just then the beetle-man poked 
his head in and piped politely 
at Ma, Good morning, Mrs. 
Henley, Im your area med stat- 
istician, come to take your blood- 
pressure and photo-snap your 
insides and all for posterity, like 
we arranged for a week ago. 

Ma slowly turned her head and 
glared at him like a bull that 
spots the matador, or, more like- 



ly, a peanut-vendor strolling 
across the ring. The red in her 
face went purple and she slowly 
reached for the bubbling coffee 
flask and slowly lifted it. The 
beetle-man innocently watched 
the lethal globe ascend with its 
tip-tilting seething brown hemi- 
core, as if all this were a job- 
indoctrination demonstration in 
astrophysics. 

Whitey started up, but I push- 
ed him back in his chair, saying 
rapidly, Not you. Even being 
an old friend of the family 
wouldnt save you from the horns 
at this moment. 

Then I rasped loud as ambu- 
lance-brakes at Ma, Hold your 
hand, you murdering old frump! 

She turned at once, as Id 
known she would. I cited her 
and she charged me with the 
coffee flask high, very much like 
a small Miura, but armed in a 
fashion to have made Manolete 
himself turn pale. But I slipped 
her with a half veronica and as 
she went past I kissed her low 
on the back of the neck, Just at 
the spot where the matadors 
sword goes in. I whisked my 
arms around her beloved thick 
waist, and the next instant she 
and Whitey and I were as happy 
as tin larks together flitting 
through a sparkling star cluster, 
and she was pouring fresh tof- 
fee for us. 

But the bettle-man, never 



154 



GALAXY 



dreaming the deadly peril hed 
been in, advanced another step 
into the kitchen and called, Mrs. 
Henley, its very needful you 
have your medical inspection. 
Youre distorting area med stat- 
istics and there are drastic pen- 
alties for evading med census. 
No need for you to undress, just 
hold still now   

I pushed the coffee flask back 
against the wall and I stroked 
Ma as I held her tight, so she 
didnt go quite as purple as she 
howled at him, You filthy med- 
spy!  do you think Ill submit 
to your peepings and be stuff for 
your filt'ny pictures when Im 
not granted decent human med 
service if I do sicken? Here I 
have four grand sons, supermen 
all  Meaghan here, whos a 
master mind doctor, and Harry 
whos still in bed, the greatest 
poet in the world, and Dick the 
Prince of Personalities, whom 
you saw speeding to work and I 
need not comment on, and Tom, 
whos a bloody wonder  and 
the filthy world takes so little 
note of them that if I go to the 
clinic its only robot doctors 
wholl see me and never a flesh- 
and-blood physician! 

Whatever the topic of her rant, 
Ma always gets in a commercial 
for her boys. 

The beetle-man quivered back 
a little at all that, but not very 



far, and piped soothingly, Mrs. 
Henley, theres nothing vulgar or 
inferior about robo med. The 
Secretary of Mental Health him- 
self prefers   he started to take 
another step into the room. 

That old sham! Ma roared, 
palpitating in my grasp and 
purpling dark. Hes the same 
one whose minions are forever 
sentencing my genius son Harry 
to the clutches of the remedial 
psychiatrists. 

But Mrs. Henley, the little 
fellow went on with rash cour- 
age, I can see with my own 
eyes youre not in the best of 
health. An immediate med- 
check   

That gave me my opening and 
I shoved Ma into Whiteys arms 
and advanced on the beetle-man 
quickly, wavering my finger like 
a sword between his bug eyes. 
You watch yourself, lad, I 
cried, or theyll be terminating 
you for making diagnoses who 
are only a census-taker. Thats 
what the licensed psychers did 
to me for adding only a few 
words of insight and wisdom Co 
my street-smiling. 

At that very moment a ghost- 
ly pattering began and swiftly 
grew louder. It seemed to come 
from everywhere. 

Whats that? the little chap 
asked wonderingly. 

The giant centipedes, I told 
him. 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



155 



T T e paled and his zoomered 
eyes searched the shadows 
under table and sink as he scut- 
tled backwards, and just at that 
moment, perhaps from the floor 
being swayed by our movements, 
the great spring on the fridge 
came loose and went klishing 
across the floor very close to 
his feet  a twenty-inch coil of 
gray wire. He leaped for the lin- 
tel of the doorway to hoist him- 
self out of reach of the veno- 
mous monster of his imagination, 
but he missed and fell and went 
leaping off as if old Fu-Manchus 
whole blessed menagerie were at 
his heels. In pure pity I follow- 
ed him under the great awning, 
polka -dotted now by the shad- 
ows showing through of the stuff 
pattering down on it, and caught 
up with him just beyond the 
mounting flake-drift. 

Dont be frightened, I told 
him, grappling him gently and 
forcing him to lift his zoomers 
to the ragged-topped wall be- 
hind, now only four to six stories 
high instead of the thirty it had 
been a week ago. Along its roll- 
er coaster margin two sinuous 
many-legged great silver beasties 
scampered, chomping great bites 
out of it and raining the digest- 
ed fragments down from their 
rear ends in concrete cornflakes. 

Those are the giant centi- 
pedes, I explained. Demolish- 
ment robots, only. 



I was thinking of how Harry 
might make a shuddery poem of 
them: glittery cosmic crawlers 
nibbling the gray rim of infinity, 
eating their way in toward us 
from the ends of the universe  
when at that instant a weightier 
chunk, rejected by one of the 
creatures delicate digestive ap- 
paratus, no doubt, came thank- 
ing down like a meteor not four 
feet from us, denting the hard 
ground and raising a geyser of 
dust. The beetle-man darted off 
a dozen more steps while 1 duck- 
ed back under the awning, calling 
to him, Now be off with you, 
little official, and trouble Ma no 
more. Shes too much for you, 
but let that not cast you down. 
Look on her as a revenant from 
a hardier, crueller age  a duch- 
ess out of place. 

I d no sooner got back in the 
kitchen, where Ma and Whitey 
were chatting over their coffee, 
than Ellie, Dicks wife, came out 
of the bed-closets full-dressed 
with bright suitcases in her hands 
and a dirty dark look in her 
eyes. She was saying, Listen all 
of you, for Ill not tell it twice, 
Im leaving that one-job no-good 
and going back to my last hus- 
band, whos still got the three 
jobs I left him with when I 
thought to better myself by en- 
tering this house of mad pride 
and sloth and poets snoring, and 



156 



GALAXY 



she brushed past me, the silver 
spring twinging again as she 
chanced to kick it. 

Meaghan, let her go, who 
cant appreciate the Prince of 
Personalities, Ma said to me 
loftily, her color down to lady- 
like bright pink again, but I still 
would have followed and argued 
with Ellie  Dick didnt deserve 
to be deserted when hed just 
got a toe on the bottom rung of 
the ladder, which of course was 
why she was leaving him though 
she didnt know it, a jealous no- 
job little wifey  except that 
just then who should appear in 
the doorway but my eldest broth- 
er, Tom, filling it with his big 
grin and his great shoulders and 
his aura of three-job success  
or would it be four now?  and 
saying, Hi, Ma. Ellie leaving 
Dick again? Whos the tiny one 
hanging around outside? Hous- 
ing official come to coax you 
once more from this death trap? 
Hello, Whitey. No, no coffee, 
Ma, I want to talk to Meaghan 
here. Ive got something for the 
lad! 

I knew what that meant, of 
course, and I was already hunch- 
ed on my hands and knees, start- 
ing to fix the spring to the fridge 
again  a job that might easily 
take the rest of the day, I decid- 
ed  when I felt Mas kindly tal- 
ons on my shoulders, lifting me 
up, and she saying, WhiteyU 



fix that, Meaghan, and then her 
beloved claws were propelling me 
to a seat at the table flush 
against the blue flexo, with my 
cup in front of me and beyond 
that Toms great face as full of 
a smile of eager elder-brother 
benignity as my cup was of 
steaming coffee  Ma having 
poured again and dropped in a 
pinch of dexy (I saw her) to 
give me spirit. 

A 11 the while I was thinking 
chiefly. What jobs he found 
now thats so bad he wont take 
it himself but offer "^t to me? 
Itd have to be pretty bad, for 
at last count Toms three jobs 
were grinding mirrors for leisure- 
time astronomers who hadnt 
time to grind their own  thats 
one  and selling retailers a 
brand of all-cornsilk cancer-free 
cigarets with the genuine coal- 
tar taste and the nicotine life  
thats two  and answering for 
a robot answering service when- 
ever the decibal-rating of the 
callers voice began to indicate 
extreme rage. He still had the 
third job, at any rate, by the 
phone-rig hanging around his 
neck. 

Meaghan, he beamed, next 
to an all-girl squad of revivalist 
angels, theres naught so won- 
drous as brother-love. I got 
something great for you. By the 
by, Ive Number Four myself 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



157 



now  I travel in ladies glow- 
in-the-dark underthings. 

As Ma raised a cheer at that, 
1 looked around for escape, but 
Whitey was squatting at the 
fridge and blocking the door to 
the outer world, as happy with 
his tinkering as a great-grand- 
father cockroach (one of which 
was walking up his leg) while 
Ma, cheering still but with a 
policemans eye on me, was tak- 
ing a cup of coffee big and smok- 
ing as a volcano into the bed- 
closets  to fire Harrys poetic 
genius, no doubt, or in lieu of 
that toss him on his lazy feet. 

Meaghan   Tom began, but 
just then his neck phone rang 
and he twitched it on and I 
could hear a voice like angry 
wasps. Tom listened and his face 
grew pink  he takes after Ma 
in that  and he said, Certain- 
ly, madam. However   and 
then his face grew purple and 
he began to bubble his mouth 
like a fish. 

I leaned across the table and 
put my lips to the mouthpiece 
and shouted, I love you dearly, 
unknown, indeed I do. I love 
you dearly, madam, brood upon 
that, and I tw'itched the thing 
off. 

That wont satisfy her, Tom 
said when he got his right color 
back and his breath. 

It will for twenty minutes," 
I told him, and what in this 



world is good for any longer? 
And then I added, reckless in 
my light-heartedness, You were 
saying . .? 

Meaghan, Tom began again, 
I know you had this trifling 
street-smilers job   

Not so trifling or iittle, I 
defended, though I hadnt in- 
tended to. The sociologists de- 
cided people looked too tense 
and glum going back and forth 
to work and shopping and so on, 
so they hired folk like myself to 
mingle among em and strike up 
talk, casual-like, to cheer em 
up. Not quite the worst idea in 
the world, either. 

CC^Tes, but you went too far, 
Tom reminded me. You 
pried into peoples minds to find 
their real troubles and set em 
straight. Thats psychers v/ork, 
my lad, and you cant blame that 
august profession for resenting 
your competition and having you 
terminated. 

I helped the people I talked 
to, I countered stubbornly. I 
couldnt have talked to them at 
all, Tom, if I hadnt something 
solid to say. 

I love you dearly, madam, 
brood upon that, Tom said. 
Solid! 

I dont worry em or push any 
of their desperation buttons, 
though I glimpsed banks of 
those, I protested on. 1 just 



158 



GALAXY 



encouraged em to widen their 
minds and feelings a little and 
get some of the comic side-wash 
of others troubles and cheer up 
naturally. 

There youve hit the nub of 
it, Tom asserted, wagging a fin- 
ger in my face. You tried to 
deliver more than your job call - 
ed for, instead of learning to do 
it with a minimum of effort and 
finding another job to go with 
it, to swell your income  and 
then another after that. He gave 
a quick look around  to make 
sure Ma hadnt come back, I 
soon realized  and then lean- 
ing forward said with a confi- 
dential hush, Oh, Meaghan, my 
boy, Ive learned so much of the 
world since I got away from 
here and Mas no longer firing 
me with resentments and wild 
ambitions. The worlds a very 
tidy comfortable place if only 
youll remember there are three 
billion other lunatic climbers in 
it  and do no more than youre 
told and watch the smiles .and 
frowns of your superiors and 
keep your eyes open and your 
nostrils flared for flicker or scent 
of another chance to make mon- 
ey. Step fast, keep adding one 
little job to the next like beads 
on a necklace, and forget Ma 
and her wild dreams. Oh and did 
I tell you my Katies got two 
jobs herself now too?  and 
never a one shed have had with , 



Ma around to hold her down. 
Mas all right, I told him 
.sharply. Shes got more courage 
and determination and vision 
than the four of usll ever have 
together. And such a fierce self- 
punishing drive I wonder shes 
still alive. How would you ever 
have got out of here to a place 
of your own without Ma boot- 
ing you? 

tt'T^rue, true, he agreed. 

Nevertheless, Mas a 
hopeless romantic. She wants her 
four sons to be Dukes of the 
World, lording it over all. 

I couldnt help chuckling at 
that, When I was still street- 
smiling, I confided, a little 
man, who thought he was a 
great romantic, opened his mind 
to me wanting only to escape 
from the prison of his life and 
aim a flashing sword at other 
men and capture with love their 
women  and corral all the sin- 
gle girls going around loose too. 
After we both looked at this 
stirring picture a while, we rea- 
lized that what he really wanted 
was to have all women mother 
him and puff him up and lead 
him through life like a great 
bobbing red balloon. 

Thats the way with all ro- 
mantics, including Ma, Tom 
said, taking advantage of me 
straightway. She wants her sons 
to be princes and kings, or board 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



159 



chairmen at all events, not rea- 
lizing theres a billion others 
starting up the success-ladder 
with them  and not one with 
a genuine ion drive. Not realiz- 
ing that the competitions too 
stiff for any man to dream of 
being more than an eight-job 
statistic with his peers. Or ten 
at most. 

The TV now was sailing over 
a great pile of gently crumpled 
bedclothes, which struck me as 
most pleasant and unlikely. Then 
I realized it was orbiting the 
Earth high above the clouds and 
there low in the foreground were 
the backs of beautifully barber- 
ed heads and now a sign flash- 
ing across the clouds: Vacation 
Jaunts through Space for Nine- 
Job Heroes of Democracy. 

Youre right about the com- 
petition, I agreed quickly with 
Tom. Im no enemy of democ- 
racy, Im one of its darlingest 
friends, but theres no question 
its upped the competition more 
than ever it was in Earths his- 
tory. Weve got more machines, 
more health, more freedom of 
movement, more education, mcwe 
leisure, more time for making 
money in our spare time, more 
almost equal people, and more 
incentives, more quick showy re- 
wards for the quickly successful 
 with the result that the com- 
petition burns us out fast enough 
to equalize all the longevity 



created by medical advance. 

It doesnt seem to be burn- 
ing you out, Tom observed. 

4<XJow listen here, Tom my 
^ ^ boy, I continued, warm- 
ing to my subject. Isnt there 
something altogether crazy about 
a world that wants to turn every- 
one into merchants no matter 
what their natural psychological 
class  a world thats turned 
even scientists and poets and 
adventurers and soldiers and 
priests into merchants busy sell- 
ing themselves  a world thats 
feared so much that the machine 
would take away all jobs that 
its gone ape creating jobs and 
financial ventures by the billions. 
With each reduction in working 
hours paralleled by an equal or 
greater increase in time spent on 
part-time and side-line jobs  a 
world thats so money- conscious 
that a man who takes his eyes 
off the dollar for a month or a 
day or even ten seconds   
Your eyes dont look red with 
squinting at silver, Tom observ- 
ed like a lemon. Besides, youre 
deafening me. 

Just then Ma came lumbering 
daintily in again and asked Tom, 
Whats this wondrous joo 
youve got for Meaghan? I cant 
wait any longer to hear. Just 
as if she hadnt been hearing 
every word and writhing at my 
negativisms. 



160 



GALAXY 



I groaned as if on the verge 
of defeat. Tom laughed and 
said, 1 was forgetting about 
that. What with Mea talking 
of billions of jobs, my one gst 
lost in the stampede. Well, it 
seems that the repair robots are 
getting unpredictable every- 
where, spending too much time 
on some jobs and not enough 
on others, and passing up still 
others altogether. One repaired 
a leak so well it built an armor 
wall six feet thick around the 
leak and himself  Fortunata, 
they called that one. Another 
found a leak and did nothing 
but start making identical leaks 
in all the pipes he followed  
until thousands of them were 
squirting behind him. A demo- 
lition robot started shooting 
rocks at a new-risen glastic 
building. Yet the circuits of these 
robots are in perfect order and 
they always behave properly un- 
der factory tests. So what must 
be done is to have a man follow 
each metal trouble-shooter and 
note every move he makes, 
watch his behavior day after 
day  taking weeks if necessary 
so the robot will get used to 
his presence and not vary his 
behavior to please or confuse or 
harm the watcher. Oh, its a 
fine sort of job  no work at all 
 sort of like what they called 
Sidewalk Inspecting back in the 
depths of history. 



I said, I suppose the robots 
theyre having the most trou- 
ble with are the ones that re- 
pair heat-tunnels and sewers and 
other delightful underground 
conduits. 

How did you know that? 
Tom asked me very quickly. 
Old sunken spillways and aqua- 
ducts and chimneys too, though 
 some of the last poking thou- 
sands of feet high into the clear 
heady air. A most healthful job, 
my boyo  a regular mountain- 
climbing and spelunking vaca- 
tion. 

I said softly, I think Id rath- 
er drown parboiled in this coffee 
cup than play psychiatric aide to 
a manic genius robot with a 
breakneck wander-urge whos 
waiting for his metal conscious- 
ness to brighten with its first 
jeweled unhuman pictures and 
electricity-loving impulses. The 
machines are coming awake, did 
you know that, Tom? All the 
machines   

No, its but one machine, a 
softer dreamier voice, mournful 
as a breeze through dead leaves, 
cut in on me. The adolescent 
wraith with hair like blond spi- 
derweb, who was Mas poet ge- 
nius and my youngest brother 
Harry, came drifting in from the 
bed-closets as if blown rather 
than walking. I could tell from 
the light-year look in his blue 
eyes that hed conned his re- 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



161 



medial psycher out of some pills. 

He went on, The whole Earth 
is one great metal machine, a 
dull steel marble amongst the 
aggies and glassies of the other 
planets. If anyone ever went out 
there with earth-eyes and not a 
spacemans, hed see it rolling 
along, over and over, like a great 
silver shop-made tumblebug 
spotted with cities and wet here 
and there with oceans, blinking 
the eyes of its ice-caps and smok- 
ing its volcanos and folding and 
unfolding its harrow-footed 
space-crazy legs in time with the 
phases of the moon. And if you 
looked real close youd see mil- 
lions of fleas jumpin off it and 
beginning the long fall to the 
nadir. 

At that moment the TV jump- 
ed to a 24-hour satellite star- 
ward of Terra and showed us 
the whole moonlit Earth backed 
by the Milky Way, as if snared 
by a diamond-dewy spiderweb. 
Ma squeaked a proud sigh at 
Harrys words thus coming out 
illustrated. 

Will you take the job? Tom 
rasped at me. 

Tomorrow I will for sure, 
I told him. And thats all the 
answer youll ever get from me 
 tomorrow or any other day. 

TV T a tapped her hoof and flash- 
ed a rageful eye at me. 
Tom, she said to him, if 



Meaghan scorns it, how about 
Harry. Think of it, Harry, you 
always claim you want to be 
alone. Roaming those cool tun- 
nels and sewers all by yourself 
except for some witless machine 
youll catch onto in ten minutes. 
Youll have all the time and 
quiet in the world to create your 
poetry. Why, underground your 
poetry will sprout like roots, Im 
sure, and run fast as crabgrass. 

Ma, Harry said, sooner 
than take that job Id head for 
Beatsville today rather than to- 
morrow. 

You wouldnt do that, Har- 
ry, Ma wailed menacingly. Tell 
me you wouldnt. Mas always 
prided herself that no matter 
how slumlike we live and close 
to Beatsville, wed never get 
there. In Beatsville they pretend 
even worse than in the suburbs, 
pretend to be supermen and pre- 
tend to be animals, and creep 
each night to the electrified 
boundary to pick up the food 
and drink left for them. 

But Harry nodded again and 
then Ma began yelling at Tom 
that he was trying to break up 
what was left of her family, hav- 
ing splintered himself off first. 
Whitey came alive and flapped 
his hands at her cautiously, like 
a torero ready to jump the 
fence. I slitted my eyes as if I 
were falling asleep. Tom got red 
as Ma and said the hell with us, 



162 



GALAXY 



he was going for good. So Ma 
stamped this way and that, now 
roaring at Harry and me for our, 
sloth, now bellowing at Tom for 
his disloyalty. Then she lifted 
her arms to heaven and froze. 

At that instant the beetle-man 
popped into the doorway and 
pointed his antennae at her. No 
one saw him but me. 

Toms face grew redder and 
he gave a snort and turned on 
his heel toward the door just 
as the beetle-man ducked out of 
sight. Tom had no sooner stamp- 
ed out than the beetle-man pop- 
ped in again behind him, waving 
a gray-black transparency hed 
whipped from his black belly- 
box. 

Mrs. Henley, he piped rap- 
idly, I got a perfect shot of all 
your insides, but thats all thats 
perfect about it. You must come 
to the clinic right away with me. 
Your hearts like a watermelon 
and your aorta and pulmonary 
like summer squash. He wag- 
gled a finger at me. Diagnosis 
by a med-spector is permissable 
in dire emergencies. 

M as face went purple. At 
that instant I felt the build- 
ing quiver from the top down 
and a heartbeat later something 
burst through tlie awning and 
struck Tom as if he were a very 
thick spike and it a hammer 
driving him into the ground. 



Ma screamed a great single 
scream and took a step forward 
and then stiffened and fell back 
and I caught her in my arms 
and lowered her to the floor and 
pillowed her head. Outside I 
could hear the beetle-man buzz- 
ing into his neckphone for an 
ambulance like the fool he was 
 for Toms head was smashed 
to the neck. Then I was wonder- 
ing how Toms blood could have 
got on Ma, for there was blood 
on her chest and then more and 
more of it, like a bull fallen from 
the final thrust and pumping his 
heart out, and then I realized 
it was Mas blood from her lungs, 
gurgling with her Cheyne-Stokes 
breathing. 

Whitey came fluttering down 
at her other side. 

Harry was standing looking at 
us and he was trembling, and 
then we heard the siren far off, 
and then another, and then the 
two of them coming closer fast, 
and as they came closer and 
their angry wailing grew louder, 
Harry began to tremble more, 
and as their sound burst into the 
open of the razed blocks, he 
cried, Im off to Beatsville, 
and he was sprinting by the time 
he v,^ent through the door. 

I knew what was coming, al- 
though there was nothing I could 
do but hold Ma. Then I knew 
that what was coming had come, 
for there was a shout and a 



THE GOOD NEW DAYS 



163 



great squealing of brakes and a 
scream and a thud, and the 
brakes still squealing. 

Then Ma stopped breathing, 
but she still looked angry. 

It was a long time before any- 
one came in, I went on holding 
Ma and wiping her face clean, 
though it stayed red for all that. 
I heard one ambulance leave and 
then the other. Finally a doctor 
came in, and the beetle-man too, 
and the doctor looked at Ma 
and shook his head and said that 
if only shed been med-checked 
regularly it need never have 
happened, but I told him, You 
didnt know Ma. And the 
beetle-man buzzed into his neck- 
phone for an ambulance back. 

I said, chokily, She died 
brave, charging the muleta dead 
on, and Im damned if Ill award 
society a single hoof of her, let 
alone the horns or the tail. No 
one got it. The beetle-man eyed 
me and took a surreptitious note. 

''T^hen for a while I was signing 
papers and listening to this 
and that, but finally they were 
all gone, the living and dead, and 
I was alone with Whitey and I 
remembered we ought to tell 
Dick. 

The TV was showing a great 
musical review with hundreds 



of highly talented actors and 
actresses, all of them seven- job 
folk and this the eighth job for 
all of them. Flights of smiles 
were going back and forth across 
the screen, like seagulls wheeling 
at sunset. 

The concrete cornflakes were 
still pattering on the awning. I 
marched us straight under the 
hole the rock had made that 
killed Tom, and they pelted on 
our hair and shoulders and necks 
like feathery hail. 

We climbed the flake-drift and 
I paused and turned round. The 
giant centipedes were busily 
crawling back and forth, the one 
swinging aside most cleverly to 
let the other pass. Theyd chew- 
ed their way here and there 
down to the second floor. 

I looked down to our shadow- 
ed doorway with the faintest 
flicker of TV still coming out 
of it, and I thought Id like to 
drive a nail a mile long down 
through the center of that room, 
pinning it there forever, and en- 
grave in the head of the nail, 
in letters a foot deep, A Family 
Lived Here. 

But that was a little beyond 
the scope of my engineering, so 
pushing Whitey ahead of me, off 
I went to tell Dick, laughing and 
crying.  FRITZ LEIBER 



164 



  -Ar 



GALAXY 



by ISAAC ASIMOV 




Five of them had come fo the pianef. 
Four were dead. The other had only 
one chance left  to live forever! 



''T^he original combination of 
-* catastrophes had taken place 
five years ago  five revolutions 
of this planet, HC-12549d by the 
charts, and nameless otherwise. 
Six-plus revolutions of Earth, but 
who was counting  any more? 

If the men back home knew, 
they might say it was a heroic 
fight, an epic of the Galactic 
Corps; five men against a hostile 
world, holding their bitter own 
for five (or six-plus) years. And 
now they were dying, the battle 
lost after all. Three were in final 
coma, a fourth had his yellow- 



tinged eyeballs still open, and a 
fifth was yet on his feet. 

But it was no question of hero- 
ism at all. It had been five men 
fighting off boredom and des- 
pair and maintaining their metal- 
lic bubble of livability only for 
the most unheroic reason that 
there was nothing else to do 
while life remained. 

If any of them felt stimulated 
by the battle, he never mentioned 
it. After the first year, they 
stopped talking of rescue, and 
after the second, a moratorium 
descended on the word, Earth. 



165 




But one word remained always 
present. If unspoken it had to be 
found in their thoughts; Am- 
monia. 

It bad come first while the 
landing was being scratched out 
against all odds on limping mo- 
tors and in a battered space can. 

You allow for bad breaks, of 
course; you expect a certain 
number  but one at a time. A 
stellar flare fries out the hyper- 
circuits  that can be repaired, 
given time. A meteorite disaligns 
the feeder-valves  they can be 
straightened, given time. A tra- 
jectory is miscalculated under 
tension and a momentarily un- 
bearable acceleration tears out 
the jump-antennae and dulls the 
senses of every man on board  
but antennae can be replaced 
and senses will recover, given 
time. 

The chances are one in count- 
less many that all three will 
happen at once; and still less 
that they will happen during a 
particularly tricky landing when 
the one necessary currency for 
the correction of all errors, time, 
is the one thing that is most 
lacking. 

'"T^he Cruiser John hit that one 
chance in countless many, 
and it made a final landing, for 
it would never lift off a planetary 
surface again. 

That it had landed essentially 



intact was itself a near-mir u I .- 
The five were given life for scr.ie 
years at least. Beyond that, oaly 
the blundering arrival of another 
ship could help, but no one ex- 
pected that. They had had their 
lifes share of coincidences, they 
knew, and all had been bad. 

That was that. 

And the key word was am- 
monia. With the surface spirall- 
ing upward, and death (merciful- 
ly quick) facing them at consider- 
ably better than even odds, Chou 
somehow had time to note the 
absorption spectrograph, which 
was registering raggedly. 

Ammonia, he cried out. The 
others heard but there was no 
time to pay attention. There was 
only the wrenching fight against 
a quick death for the sake of a 
slow one. 

When they landed finally, on 
sandy ground with sparse, rag- 
ged bluish vegetation; reedy 
grass; stunted tree-like objects 
with blue bark and no leaves; no 
sign of animal life; and with 
an almost greenish cloud- 
streaked sky above  the word 
came back to haunt them. 

Ammonia? said Petersen 
heavily. 

Chou said, Four percent. 

Impossible, said Petersen. 

But it wasnt. The books 
didnt say impossible. What the 
Galactic Corps had discovered 
was that a planet of a certain 



166 



GALAXY 



mass and volume and at a certain 
temperature was an ocean planet 
and had one of two atmospheres; 
nitrogen/oxygen or nitrogen/car- 
bon dioxide. In the former case, 
life was rampant in the latter, it 
was primitive. 

No one checked beyond mass, 
volume and temperature any 
longer. One took the atmosphere 
(one or the other of them) for 
granted. But the books didnt say 
it had to be so; just that it al- 
ways was so. Other atmospheres 
were thermodynamically pos- 
sible, but extremely unlikely so 
they werent found in actual 
practice. 

Until now. The men of the 
Cruiser John had found one and 
were bathed for the rest of such 
life as they could eke out by a 
nitrogen /carbon dioxide/ ammon- 
ia atmosphere. 

'^'^he men converted their ship 
into an underground bubble 
of Earth-type surroundings. 
They could not lift off the sur- 
face, nor could they drive a com- 
municating beam through hyper- 
space, but all else was salvage- 
able. To make up for inefficien- 
cies in the cycling system, they 
could even tap the planets own 
water and air supply within lim- 
its; provided, of course, they sub- 
tracted the ammonia. 

They organized exploring par- 
ties since their suits were in ex- 



cellent condition and it passed 
the time. The planet was harm- 
less; no animal life; sparse plant 
life everywhere. Blue, always 
blue ; ammoniated chlorophyll ; 
arnmoniated protein. 

They set up laboratories, an- 
alyzed the plant components, 
studied microscopic sections, 
compiled vast volumes of find- 
ings. They tried growing native 
plants in ammonia-free atmos- 
phere and failed. They made 
themselves into geologists and 
studied the planets crust; as- 
tronomers and studied the spec- 
trum of the planets sun. 

Barrere would say sometimes, 
Eventually, the Corps will reach 
this planet again and well leave 
a legacy of knowledge for them. 
Its a unique planet after all. 
There might not be another 
Earth-type with ammonia in all 
the Milky Way. 

Great, said Sandropoulos, 
bitterly. What luck for us. 

Sandropoulos worked out the 
thermodynamics of the situation. 
A metastable system, he said. 
The ammonia disappears stead- 
ily through geochemical oxida- 
tion that forms nitrogen; the 
plants utilize nitrogen and re- 
form ammonia, adapting them- 
selves to the presence of ammon- 
ia. If the rate of plant formation 
of ammonia dropped two per- 
cent, a declining spiral would set 
in. Plant life would wither, re- 



FOUNDING FATHER 



167 



ducing the ammonia still further 
and so on. 

You mean if we killed enough 
plant life, said Vlassov, we 
could wipe out the ammonia. 

If we had air-sleds and wide- 
angle blasters, and a year to work 
in, we might, said Sandropoulos, 
but we havent and theres a bet- 
ter way. If we could get our 
plants going, the formation of 
oxygen through photosynthesis 
would increase the rate of am- 
monia oxidation. Even a small 
localized rise would lower the 
ammonia in the region, stimulate 
Earth-plant growth further, and 
inhibit the native growth, drop 
the ammonia further and so on. 

They became gardeners 
through all the growing season. 
That was, after all, routine for 
the Galactic Corps. Life on 
Earth-type planets was usually 
of the water/protein type, but 
variation was infinite and other- 
world food was rarely nourishing 
and even more often happened 
(not always, but often) that 
some types of Earth-plants 
would overrun and drown out the 
native flora. With the native 
flora held down, other Earth- 
plants could take root. 

T^ozens of planets had been 
converted into new Earths 
in this fashion. In the process 
Earth-plants developed hundreds 
of hardy varieties that flourished 



under extreme condition.s  All 
the better with which to seed the 
next planet. 

The ammonia would kill any 
Earth-plant, but the seeds at the 
disposal of the Cruiser John were 
not true Earth-plants but other- 
world mutations of these plants. 
They fought hard but not well 
enough. Some varieties grew in a 
feeble, sickly manner and died. 

At that they did better than 
did microscopic life. The planets 
bacterioids were far more flour- 
ishing than was the planets 
straggly blue plant-life. The na- 
tive microorganisms drowned out 
any attempt at competition from 
Earth-samples. The attempt to 
seed the alien soil with Earth- 
type bacterial flora in order to 
aid the Earth-plants failed. 

Vlassov shook his head, It 
wouldnt do anyway. If our bac- 
teria survived, it would only be 
by adapting to the presence of 
ammonia. 

Sandropoulos said, Bacteria 
wont help us. We need the 
plants ; they carry the oxygen 
manufacturing systems. 

We could make some our- 
selves, said Petersen. We could 
electrolyze water. 

How long will our equipment 
last? If we could only get our 
plants going it would be like elec- 
trolyzing water forever, little by 
little, but year after year, till the 
planet gave up. 



168 



GALAXY 



Barrere said, Lets treat the 
soil then. Its rotten with am- 
nnK)nium salts. Well bake the 
salts out and replace the ammon- 
ia-free soil. 

And what about the atmos- 
phere? asked Chou. 

In ammonia-free soil, they 
may catch hold despite the at- 
mosphere. They almost make it 
as is. 

They worked like longshore- 
men, but with no real end in 
view. None really thought it 
would work, and there was no 
future for themselves, personally, 
even if it did work. But working 
passed the days. 

The next growing season, they 
had their ammonia-free soil, but 
Earth-plants still grew only feeb- 
ly. They even placed domes over 
several shoots and pumped am- 
monia-free air within. It helped 
slightly but not enough. They ad- 
justed the chemical composition 
of the soil in every possible fash- 
ion. There was no reward. 

The feeble shoots produced 
their tiny whiffs of oxygen, but 
not enough to topple the am- 
monia atmosphere off its base. 

One more push, said San- 
dropoulos, one more. Were 
rocking it; were rocking it; but 
we cant knock it over. 

''T^heir tools and equipment 
blunted and wore out with 
time and the future closed in 



steadily. Each month there was 
less room for maneuver. 

When the end came at last, it 
was with almost gratifying sud- 
denness. There was no name to 
place on the weakness and ver- 
tigo. No one actually suspected 
direct ammonia poisoning. Still, 
they were living off the algal 
growth of what had once been 
ship-hydroponics for years and 
the growths were themselves 
aberrant with possible ammonia 
contamination. 

It could have been the work- 
ings of some native microorgan- 
ism which might finally have 
learned to feed off them. It might 
even have been an Earthly mic- 
roorganism, mutated under the 
conditions of a strange world. 

So three died at last and did 
so, circumstances be praised, 
painlessly. They were glad to 
go, and leave the useless fight. 

Chou said, in a voiceless whis- 
per, Its foolish to lose so bad- 
ly. 

Petersen, alone of the five to 
be on his feet (was he immune, 
whatever it was?) turned a griev- 
ing face toward his only living 
companion. 

Dont die, he said, dont 
leave me alone. 

Chou tried to smile. I have 
no choice. But you can follow us, 
old friend. Why fight? The tools 
are gone and there is no way of 
winning now, if there ever was. 



FOUNDING FATHER 



169 



Even now, Petersen fought off 
final despair by concentrating on 
the fight against the atmosphere. 
But his mind was weary, his 
heart worn out, and when Chou 
died the next hour, he was left 
with four corpses to work with. 

He stared at the bodies, count- 
ing over the memories, stretching 
them back (now that he was 
alone and dared wail) to Earth 
itself, which he had last seen on 
a visit eleven years before. 

He would have to bury the 
bodies He would break off the 
bluish branches of the native 
leafless trees and build crosses 
of them. He would hang the 
space helmet of each man on top 
and prop the oxygen cylinders 
below. Empty cylinders to sym- 
bolize the lost fight. 

A foolish sentiment for men 
who could no longer care, and 
for future eyes that might never 
see. 

But he was doing it for him- 
self, to show respect for his 
friends, and respect for himself, 
too, for he was not the kind of 
man to leave his friends untend- 
ed in death while he himself 
could stand. 

Besides  

Besides? He sat in weary 
thought for some moments. 

While he was still alive, he 
would fight with such tools as 
were left. He would bury his 
friends. 



T T e buried each in a spot of 
^ ^ ammonia-free soil they had 
so laboriously built up; buried 
them without shroud and with- 
out clothing; leaving them naked 
in the hostile ground for the slow 
decomposition that would come 
with' their own microorganisms 
before those, too, died with the 
inevitable invasion of the native 
bacterioids. 

Petersen placed each cross, 
with its helmet and oxygen cylin- 
ders, propped each with rocks 
then turned away, grim and sad- 
eyed, to return to the buried ship 
that he now inhabited alone. 

He worked each day and even- 
tually the symptoms came for 
him, too. 

He struggled into his space 
suit and came to the surface for 
what he knew would be one last 
time. 

He fell to his knees on the 
garden-plots. The Earth plants 
were green. They had lived 
longer than ever before. They 
looked healthy, even vigorous. 

They had patched the soil, 
babied the atmosphere, and now 
Petersen had used the last tool, 
the only one remaining at his dis- 
posal, and he had given them fer- 
tilizer as well  

Out of the slowly corrupting 
flesh of the Earthmen came the 
nutrients that supplied the final 
push. Out of the Earth-plants 
came the oxygen that would beat 



170 



GALAXY 



back the ammonia and push the 
planet out of the unaccountable 
niche into which it had stuck. 

If Earthmen ever came again 
(when? a million years hence?) 
they would find a nitrogen/oxy- 
gen atmosphere and a limited 
flora strangely reminiscent of 
Earths. 

The crosses would rot and de- 
cay, the metal rust and decom- 
pose. The bones might fossilize 



and remain to give a hint as to 
what happened. Their own rec- 
ords, sealed away, might be 
found. 

But none of that mattered. If 
nothing at all was ever found, 
the planet itself, the whole 
planet, would be their monu- 
ment. 

And Petersen lay down to die 
in the midst of their victory. 

ISAAC ASIMOV 



FORECAST 

Actually our editorial this month is our forecast, but it's on a some- 
whdt longer-range scale than usual. Restricting our view to the single issue 
coming up next, here's what it looks like now: 

The lead is by C. C. MacApp, a writer who hitherto has appeared in 
Galaxy only as the author of a couple of biting and sardonically funny 
short stories like And All the Earth a Grave and A Flask of Fine Arcturan. 
Next month's is quite different. It's an adventure story. The place is the 
planet Mercury. The time, some hundreds of years in the future; and the 
title is The Mercurymen. Pederson has done the cover for it; and if the 
object you see in the background looks to you like a covered wagon  if 
is! It has to be, in fact  for reasons you will discover when you read the 
story. 

Robert Silverberg will join us again next issue with a long novelette 
called The Warriors of Light. And we have a pointed and funny novelette 
by a new writer named Norman Kagan (you may remember that he was 
one of the "firsts" we print in every issue of our companion magazine, If, 
some time ago. His story then was called The Mathenauts, and it was im- 
mediately selected for "best of the year" honors). What Kagan is writing 
about this time is politics  the grandest game of them all, as they say; 
but in Kagan's story the rules are those invented by Franz Kafka, and nat- 
urally enough the story is called Laugh Along with Franz. 

We also have a couple of shorts of special interest, since both mark 
the first and long overdue appearance of their authors in Galaxy. One is 
a very short one by Arthur C. Clarke (but he calls it the longest story ever 
written, for reasons you will see when you read it); the other is by Harlan 
Ellison. If they fit they'll be in! 

FOUNDING FATHER 171 



Shall We Have 
a Little Talk? 

by ROBERT SHECKLEY 

Illustrated by GAUGHAN 



Earth didn't just walk in and conquer 
planets  there were definite rules! 
Why wouldn't these people cooperate? 



I 

'"T^he landing was a piece of cake 
despite gravitational vaga- 
ries produced by two suns and 
six moons. Low-level cloud cover 
could have given him some 
trouble if Jackson had been com- 
ing in visually. But he considered 
that to be kid stuff. It was better 
and safer to plug in the computer 
and lean back and enjoy the 
ride. 



The cloud cover broke up at 
2000 feet. Jackson was able to 
confirm his earlier sighting : there 
was a city down there, just as 
sure as sure. 

He was in one of the worlds 
loneliest jobs; but his line of 
work, paradoxically enough, re- 
quired an extremely gregarious 
man. Because of this built-in con- 
tradiction, Jackson was in the 
habit of talking to himself. Most 
of the men in his line of work 



172 



did. Jackson would talk to any- 
one, human or alien, no matter 
what their size or shape or color. 

It was what he was paid to do, 
and what he had to do anyhow. 
He talked when he was alone on 
the long interstellar runs, and he 
talked even more when he was 
with someone or something that 
would talk back. He figured he 
was lucky to be paid for his com- 
pulsions. 

And not just paid, either, he 
reminded himself. Well paid, 
and with a bonus arrangement on 
top of that. And furthermore, 
this feels like my lucky planet. 
I feel like I could get rich on this 
one; unless they kill me down 
there, of course. 

The lonely flights between the 
planets and the imminence of 
death were the only disadvan- 
tages of this job; but if the work 
werent hazardous and difficult, 
the pay wouldnt be so good. 

Would they kill him? You 
could never tell. Alien life-forms 
were unpredictable  just like 
humans, only more so. 

But I dont think theyll kill 
me, Jackson said. I just feel 
downright lucky today. 

This simple philosophy had 
sustained him for years, across 
the endless lonely miles of space, 
and in and out of ten, twelve, 
twenty planets. He saw no reason 
to change his outlook now. 

The ship landed. Jackson 

SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK 



switched the status controls to 
standby. 

He checked the analyzer for 
oxygen and trace-element con- 
tent in the atmosphere, and took 
a quick survey of the local micro- 
organisms. The place was viable. 
He leaned back in his chair and 
waited. It didnt take long, of 
course. They  the locals, in- 
digenes, authochtones, whatever 
you wanted to call them  came 
out of their city to look at the 
spaceship. And Jackson looked 
through the port at them. 

Well now, he said. Seems 
like the alien life-forms in this 
neck of the woods are honest-to- 
Joe humanoids. That means a 
five thousand dollar bonus for old 
Uncle Jackson. 

''X^he inhabitants of the city 
were bipedal monocepha- 
loids. They had the appropriate 
number of fingers, noses, eyes, 
ears and mouths. Their skin was 
a flesh-colored beige, their lips 
were a faded red, their hair was 
black, brown or red. 

Shucks, theyre just like 
home-folks! Jackson said. Hell, 
I ought to get an extra bonus for 
that. Humanoidissmus, eh? 

The aliens wore clothes. Some 
of them carried elaborately 
carved lengths of wood like 
swagger-sticks. The women deco- 
rated themselves with carved 
and enameled ornaments. At a 

173 



flying guess. Jackson ranked 
them about equivalent to Late 
Bronze Age on Earth. 

They talked and gestured 
among themselves. Their lan- 
guage was, of course, incompre- 
hensible to Jackson; but that 
didnt matter. The important 
thing was that they had a lan- 
guage, and that their speech 
sounds could be produced by his 
vocal apparatus. 

Not like on that heavy planet 
last year. Jackson said. Those 
supersonic sons of bitches! I had 
to wear special earphones and 
mike, and it was 110 in the 
shade. 

The aliens were waiting for 
him, and Jackson knew it. That 
first moment of actual contact  
it always was a nervous business. 

Thats when they were most 
apt to let you have it. 

Reluctantly he moved to the 
hatch, undogged, it, rubbed his 
eyes and cleared his throat. He 
managed to produce a smile. He 
told himself, Dont get sweaty, 
member, youre just a little old 
Jackson, dont choke up. Re- 
member youre just a little old 
interstellar wanderer  kind of 
galactic vagabond  to extend 
the hand of friendship and all 
that jazz. Youve just dropped in 
for a little talk, nothing more. 
Keep on believing that, sweety, 
and the extraterrestrial Johns will 
believe right along with you. Re- 



member Jacksons Law: All in- 
telligent life-forms share the di- 
vine faculty of gulli'Diiity; which 
means that the triple-tongued 
Thung of Orangus V can be 
conned out of his skin just as 
easily as Joe Doakes of St. Paul. 

And so, wearing a brave, arti- 
ficial little smile, Jackson swung 
the port open and stepped out 
to have a little talk. 

tW'oll now, how jhall? Jack- 
^ son asl.ed at once, just to 
hear the sound of his own voice. 

The nearest aliens shrank away 
from him. Nearly all of them were 
frowning. Several of the younger 
ones carried bronze knives in a 
forearm scabbard. These were 
clumsy weapons, but as effective 
as anything ever invented. The 
aliens started to draw. 

Now take it easy, Jackson 
said, keeping his voice light and 
unalarmed. 

They drew their knives and 
began to edge forward. Jackson 
stood his ground, waiting, ready 
to bolt through the hatch like a 
jet-propelled jack-rabbit, hoping 
he could make it. 

Then a third man (might as 
well call them men Jackson de- 
cided) stepped in front of the 
belligerent two. This one was 
older. He spoke rapidly. He ges- 
tured. The two with the knives 
looked. 



174 



GALAXY 



Thats right, Jackson said 
encouragingly. Take a good look. 
Heap big spaceship. Plenty strong 
medicine. Vehicle of great power, 
fabricated by a real advanced 
technology. Sort of makes you 
stop and think, doesnt it? 

It did. 

The aliens had stopped; 
and if not thinking, they were at 
least doing a great deal of talk- 
ing. They pointed at the ship, 
then back at their city. 

Youre getting the idea, 
Jackson told them. Power 
speaks a universal language, eh, 
cousins? 

He had been witness to many 
of these scenes on many different 
planets. He could nearly write 
their dialogue for them. It usu- 
ally went like this: 

Intruder lands in outlandish 
space vehicle, thereby eliciting 
(1) curiosity, (2) fear and (3) 
hostility. After some minutes of 
awed contemplation, one autoch- 
thone usually said to his friend: 
Hey, that damned metal thing 
packs one hell of a lot of power. 

Youre right, Herbie, his 
friend Fred, the second autoch- 
tiion, would reply. 

You bet Im right, Herbie 
would say. And hell, with that 
much power and technology and 
stuff, this son of a gun could like 
enslave us: I mean he really 
could. 

Youve hit it, Herbie, thats 
SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK 



just exactly what could happen. 
So what I say, Herbie would 
continue, I say, lets not take 
any risks. I mean, sure, he looks 
friendly enough, but hes just got 
too damned much power, and 
thats not right. And right now is 
the best chance well ever get to 
take him on account of hes just 
standing there waiting for like an 
ovation or something. So lets 
put this bastard out of his misery, 
and then we can talk the whole 
thing over, and see how it stacks 
up situationwise. 

By Jesus, Im with you! 
cries Fred. Others signify their 
assent. 

Good for you, lads, cries 
Herbie. Lets wade in and take 
this alien joker like now!" 

So they start to make their 
move; but suddenly, at the last 
second. Old Doc (the third 
autochthon) intervenes, saying, 
Hold it a minute, boys, we can't 
do it like that. For one thing, 
we got laws around here   

To hell with that, says P'red 
(a born troublemaker and some- 
what simple to boot). 

  and aside from the laws, 
it would be just too damned 
dangerous for us. 

Men Fred here aint scared, 
says valiant Herb. Maybe you 
better go take in a movie or 
something, Doc. Us guysll handle 
this. 

I was not referring to a short- 

175 



range personal danger, Old Doc 
says scornfully. What I fear is 
the destruction of our city, the 
slaughter of our loved ones and 
the annhilation of our culture. 
Herb and Fred stop. What 
you talking about, Doc? Hes just 
one stinking alien; you push a 
knife in his guts, hell bleed like 
anyone else. 

Fools! Schlemiels! thunders 
the wise old Doc. Of course you 
can kill him! But what happens 
after that? 

Huh? says Fred, squinting 
his china-blue pop eyes. 

Idiots! Cochons! You think 
this is the only spaceship these 
aliens got? You think they dont 
even know whereabouts this guy 
has gone? Man, you gotta assume 
they got plenty more ships where 
this one came from, and you got- 
ta also assume that theyll be 
damned mad if this ship doesnt 
show up when its supposed to, 
and you gotta assume that when 
these aliens learn the score theyre 
gonna be damned sore and buzz 
back here and stomp on every- 
thing and everybody. 

How come I gotta assume 
that? asks feeble-witted Fred. 

Cause its what youd do in a 
deal like that, right? 

I guess maybe I would at 
that, says Fred, with a sheep- 
ish grin. Yeah, I just might do 
that little thing. But look, may- 
be they wouldnt. 

176 



Maybe, maybe, mimics wise 
old Doc. Well, baby, v-je cant 
risk the whole ball game on a 
goddamned maybe. We cant af- 
ford to kill this alien joker 
or the chance that maybe his 
people wouldnt do what any 
reasonable-minded guy would do, 
which is namely to blow us all 
to hell. 

Well, I suppose we maybe 
cant, Herbie says. But Doc, 
what can we do? 

Just wait and see what he 
wants . 

II 

A scene very much like that, 
according to reliable recon- 
struction, had been enacted at 
least thirty or forty times. It 
usually resulted in a policy of 
wait-and-see. Occasionally the 
contactor from Elarth was killed 
before wise counsel could prevail; 
but Jackson was paid to take 
risks like that. 

Whenever the contactor was 
killed, retribution followed with 
swift and terrible inevitability. 
Also with regret, of course, be- 
cause Earth was an extremely 
civilized place and accustomed to 
living within the law. No civiliz- 
ed law-abiding race likes to 
commit genocide. In fact, the 
folks on Earth consider genocide 
a very unpleasant matter, and 
they dont like to read about it 

GALAXY 



or anything like it in their morn- 
ing papers. Envoys must be pro- 
tected, of course, and murder 
must be punished ; everybody 
knows that. But it still doesnt 
feel nice to read about a geno- 
cide over your morning coffee. 
News like that can spoil a mans 
entire day. Three or four geno- 
cides and a man just might get 
angry enough to switch his vote. 

Fortunately, there was never 
much occasion for that sort of 
mess. Aliens usually caught on 
pretty fast. Despite the language 
barrier, aliens learned that you 
simply dont kill Earthmen. 

And then, later, bit by bit, they 
learned all the rest. 

^"T^he hot-heads had sheathed 
their knives. Everybody was 
smiling except Jackson, who was 
grinning like a hyena. The aliens 
were making graceful arm-and- 
leg motions, probably of wel- 
come. 

Well, thats real nice, Jack- 
son said, making a few graceful 
gestures of his own. Makes me 
feel real to-home. And now, sup- 
pose you take me to your leader, 
show me the town and all that 
jazz. Then Ill set myself down 
and figure out that lingo of yours, 
and well have a little talk. And 
after that, everything will proceed 
splendidly. En avanti 

So saying, Jackson stepped out 
at a brisk pace in the direction 
SHALL WE HAVE A LIHLE TALK 



of the city. After a brief hesita- 
tion, his new-found friends fell 
into step behind him. 

Everything was moving accord- 
ing to plan. 

Jackson, like all the other Con- 
tactors, was a polyglot of singu- 
lar capabilities. As basic equip- 
ment, he had an eidetic memory 
and an extremely discriminating 
ear. More important, he possess- 
ed a startling aptitude for langu- 
age and an uncanny intuition for 
meaning. When Jackson came up 
against an incomprehensible ton- 
gue, he picked out, quickly and 
unerringly, the significant units, 
the fundamental building blocks 
of the language. Quite without 
effort he sorted vocalizations in- 
to cognitive, volitional and emo- 
tional aspects of speech. Gram- 
matical elements presented them- 
selves at once to his practiced ear. 
Affixes and suffixes were no 
trouble: word sequence, pitch and 
reduplication were no sweat. He 
didnt know much about the 
science of linguistics, but he didnt 
need to know. Jackson was a nat- 
ural. Linguistics had been devel- 
oped to describe and explain 
things which he knew intuitively. 

He had not yet encountered 
the language which he could not 
learn. He never really expected 
to find one. As he often told his 
friends in the Forked Totigue 
Club in New York, Waal, shu- 
kins, there just really aint nuthin 

177 



tough about them alien tongues. 
Leastwise, not the ones Ive run 
across. I mean that sincerely. I 
mean to tell you, boys, that the 
man who can express hisself in 
Sioux or Khmer aint going to 
encounter too much trouble out 
there amongst the stars. 

And so it had been, to date . 

Once in the city, there were 
many tedious ceremonies which 
Jackson had to endure. They 
stretched on for three days  
about par for the course. He 
knew the reason for them, of 
course; it wasnt every day that a 
traveller from Space came in for 
a visit. So naturally enough every 
mayor, governor, president and 
alderman, and their wives, wanted 
to shake his hand. It was all very 
understandable, but Jackson re- 
sented the waste of his time. He 
had work to do, some of it not 
very pleasant, and the sooner 
he got started the quicker it 
would be over. 

On the fourth day he was able 
to reduce the official nonsense to 
a minimum. That was the day 
in which he began in earnest to 
learn the local language. 

A language, as any linguist will 
tell you, is undoubtedly the 
most beautiful creation one is 
ever likely to encounter. But 
with that beauty goes a certain 
element of danger. 

Language might aptly be com- 
178 



pared to the sparkling, ever- 
changing face of the sea. Like 
the sea, you never know what 
reefs may be concealed in its 
pellucid depths. The brightest 
water hides the most treacherous 
shoals. 

Jackson, well-prepared for 
trouble, encountered none at first. 
The main language (Hon) of this 
planet (Na), was spoken by the 
overwhelming majority of its in- 
habitants (En-a-To-Na  liter- 
ally, men of the Na, or Naians, 
as Jackson preferred of think of 
them). Hon seemed quite a 
straightforward affair. It used 
one term for one concept, and 
allowed no fusions, juxtapositions 
or agglutinations. Concepts were 
built up by sequences of simple 
words (spaceship was ho-pa- 
aie-an  boat-flying-outer-sky). 
Thus, Hon was very much like 
Chinese and Annamite on Earth. 
Pitch differences were employed 
not only intentionally to differ- 
entiate between homonyns, but 
also positionally, to denote grad- 
ations of perceived realism, 
bodily discomfort and three class- 
es of pleasurable expectation. All 
of which was mildly interesting 
but of no particular difficulty to 
a competent linguist. 

To be sure, a language like 
Hon was rather a bore because of 
the long word-lists one had to 
memorize. But pitch and position 
could be fun, as well as being ab- 

GALAXY 



solutely essential if one wanted 
to make any sense out of the 
sentence-units. So, taken all in 
all, Jackson was not dissatisfied, 
and he absorbed the language as 
quickly as it could be given to 
him. 

It was a proud day for Jack- 
son, about a week later, when he 
could say to his tutor: A very 
nice and pleasant good morning 
to you, most estimable and hon- 
ored tutor, and how is your bless- 
ed health upon this glorious 
day? 

Felicitations most ird wunk! 
the tutor replied with a smile of 
deep warmth. Your accent, dear 
pupil, is superb ! Positively gor 
nak, in fact, and your grasp of my 
dear mother tongue is little short 
of ur nak tai. 

Jackson glowed all over from 
the gentle old tutors compli- 
ments. He felt quite pleased with 
himself. Of course, he hadnt 
recognized several words; ird 
wunk and ur nak tai sounded 
faintly familiar, but gor nak was 
completely unknown. Still lapses 
were expected of a beginner in 
any language. He did know 
enough to understand the Naians, 
and to make himself understood 
by them. And that was what his 
job required. 

He returned to his spaceship 
that afternoon. The hatch had 
been standing open during his 
entire stay on Na but he found 

SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK 




179 



that not a single article had been 
stolen. He shook his nead rue- 
fully at this, but refused to let it 
upset him. He loaded his pockets 
with a variety of objects and 
sauntered back to the city. He 
was ready to perform the tinal 
and most important part of his 
job. 

HI 

n the heart of the business dis- 
trict, at the intersection of Um 
and Alhretto, he found what he 
was looking for; a real estate of- 
fice. He entered, and was taken 
to the office of Mr. Erum, a jun- 
ior partner of the firm. 

Well, well, well, well! Erum 
said, shaking hands heartily. 
This is a real honor, sir, a very 
considerable and genuine privi- 
lege. Are you thinking of acquir- 
ing a piece of property? 

That was my intention, 
Jackson said. Unless, of course, 
you have discriminatory laws 
that forbid your selling to a fore- 
igner. 

No difficulty there, Erum 
said. In fact, itll be a veritable 
orai of a pleasure to have a man 
from your distant and glorious 
civilization in our midst. 

Jackson restrained a snicker. 
The only other difficulty I can 
imagine is the question of legal 
tender. I dont have any of your 
currency, of course; but I have 
180 



certain quantities of gold, plati- 
num, diamonds and other objects 
which are considered valuable on 
Earth. 

They are considered valuable 
here, too, Erum said. Quanti- 
ties, did you say? My dear sir, we 
will have no difficulties; not even 
a blaggle shall mit or ows, as the 
poet said. 

Quite so, Jackson replied. 
Erum was using some words he 
didnt know, but that didnt mat- 
ter. The main drift was clear 
enough. Now, suppose we begin 
with a nice industrial site. After 
all, Ill have to do something with 
my time. And after that we can 
pick out a house. 

Most decidedly prominex, 
Erum said gaily. Suppose I just 
raish through my listings here 
. Yes, what do you say to a 
bromicaine factory? Its in a first- 
class condition, and could easily 
be converted to vor manufacture, 
or used as it is. 

Is there any real market for 
bromicaine? Jackson asked. 

Well, bless my muergentan, 
of course there is! Bromicaine is 
indispensable, though its sales are 
seasonable. You see, refined 
bromicaine, or ariisi, is used by 
the protigash devolvers, who of 
course harvest by the solstice- 
season, except in those branches 
of the industry that have switch- 
ed over to ticothene revature. 
Those from a steadily   



GALAXY 



Fine, fine, Jackson said. He 
didnt care what a bromicaine 
was, and never expected to see 
one. As long as it was a gainful 
employment of some kind it fill- 
ed his specifications. 

Ill buy it, he said. 

You wont regret it, Erum 
told him. A good bromicaine 
factory is a garveldis hagatis, and 
menifoy as well. 

Sure, Jackson said, wishing 
that he had a more extensive 
Hon vocabulary. How much? 
Well, sir, the price is no dif- 
ficulty. But first youll have to 
fill out the ollanbrit form. It is 
just a few sken questions which 
ny naga of everyone. 

E rum handed Jackson the form. 

The first question read: 
Have you, now or at any past 
time, elikated mushkies forsical- 
ly? State date of all occurrences. 
If no occurrences, state the rea- 
son for transgrishal reduct as 
found. 

Jackson read no farther. What 
does it mean, he asked Erum, 
to elikate mushkies forsically? 
Mean? Erum smiled uncer- 
tainly. Why, it means exactly 
what it says. Or so I would im- 
agine. 

I meant, Jackson said, that 
I do not understand the words. 
Could you explain them to me? 
Nothing simpler, Erum re- 
plied. To elikate mushkies is 
SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK 



almost the same as a bifur pro- 
bishkai. 

I beg your pardon? Jackson 
said. 

It means  well, to elikate 
is really rather simple, though 
perhaps not in the eyes of the 
law. Scorbadising is a form of 
elikation, and so is manruv gar- 
ing. Some say that when V7e 
breathe drorsically in the evening 
subsis we are actually elikating. 
Personally, I consider that a bit 
fanciful. 

Lets try mushkies, Jackson 
suggested. 

By all means, lets! Erum re- 
plied, with a coarse boom of 
laughter. If only one could  
eh? He dug Jackson in the ribs 
with a sly elbow. 

Hm, yes, Jackson replied 
coldly. Perhaps you could tell 
me what, exactly, a mushkie is? 

Of course. As it happens, 
there is no such thing, Erum 
replied. Not in the singular, at 
any rate. One mushkie would be 
a logical fallacy, dont you see? 

Ill take your word for it. 
What are mushkies? 

Well, primarily, theyre the 
object of elikation. Secondarily, 
they are halfsize wooden sandals 
which are used to stimulate ero- 
tic fantasies among the Kutor 
religionists. 

Now were getting some- 
place! Jackson cried. 

Only if your tastes happen to 

181 



run that way, Erum answered 
with discernable coldness. 

I meant in terms of under- 
standing the question on the 
form   

Of course, excuse me, Erum 
said. But you see, the question 
asks if you have ever elikated 
mush kies forsically. And that 
makes all the difference. 

Does it really? 

Of course! The modification 
changes the entire meaning. 

I was afraid that it would, 
Jackson said. I dont suppose 
you could explain what forsically 
means? 

I certainly can! Erum said. 
Our conversation now could  
with a slight assist from the 
deme imagination  be termed 
a forsically designed talk." 

Ah, said Jackson. 

Quite so, said Erum. For- 
sically is a mode, a manner It 
means spiritually-forward-lead- 
ing - by - way - of - fortuitous 
- frieindship.  

Thats a little more like it, 
Jackson said. In that case, when 
one elikates mushkies forsical- 
ly   

 

ttTm terribly afraid youre on 
Ji- the wrong track, Erum 
said. The definition I gave you 
applies only to conversations. It 
is something rather different 
when one speaks of mushkies. 
What does it mean then? 

182 



Well, it means  or rather it 
expresses  an advanced and 
intensified case of mushkie eliki- 
dation, but with a definite nmog- 
metic bias. I consider it a rather 
unfortunate phraseology, person- 
ally. 

How would you put it? 

Id lay it on the line and to 
hell with the fancy talk, Erum 
said toughly. Id come right 
out and say: Have you now or 
at any other time dunfiglers voc 
in illegal, immoral, or insirtis 
circumstances, with or without 
the aid and/or consent of a 
brachniian? If so, state when and 
why. If not, state neugris kris and 
why not.  

Thats how youd put it, huh ? 
Jackson said. 

Sure I would, Erum said di- 
fiantly. These forms are for 
adults, arent they? So why not 
come right out and call a spigler 
a spigler a spey? Everybody dun- 
figlers voc some of the time, and 
so what? No ones feelings are 
ever hurt by it, for heavens sake. 
I mean, after all, it simply in- 
volves oneself and a twisted old 
piece of wood, so why should 
anyone care? 

Wood? Jackson echoed. 

Yes, wood. A commonplace, 
dirty old piece of wood. Or at 
least thats all it would be if 
people didnt get their feelings 
so ridiculously involved. 

What do they do with the 
GALAXY 



wood? Jackson asked quickly. 

Do with it? Nothing much, 
when you come right down to it. 
But the religious aura is simply 
too much for our so-called in- 
tellectuals. They are unable, in 
my opinion, to isolate the simple 
primordial fact  wood  from 
the cultural volturneiss which 
surrounds it at festerhius, and to 
some extent at Uuis, too. 

Thats how intellectuals are, 
Jackson said. But you can iso- 
late it, and you find   

I find its really nothing to 
get excited about. I really mean 
that. I mean to say that a cath- 
edral, viewed correctly, is no 
more than a pile of rocks, and a 
forest is just an assembly of 
atoms. Why should we see this 
case differently? I mean, really, 
you could elikate mushkies forsi- 
cally without even using woodl 
What do you think of that? 
Im impressed, Jackson said. 
Dont get me wrong! Im not 
saying it would be easy, or natur- 
al, or even right. But still, you 
damned well could! Why, you 
could substitute cormed grayti 
and still come out all right! 
Erum paused and chuckled. 
Youd look foolish, but youd 
still come out all right. 

Very interesting, Jackson 
said. 

Im afraid I became a bit 
vehement, Erum said, wiping his 
forehead. Was I talking very 
SHALL WE HAVE A LIHLE TALK 



loudly? Do you think perhaps I 
was overheard? 

Of course not. I found it all 
very interesting. I must leave 
just now, Mr. Erum, but Ill be 
back tomorrow to fill out that 
form and buy the property. 
Ill hold it for you, Erum 
said, rising and shaking Jacksons 
hand warmly. And I want to 
thank you. It isnt often that I 
have the opportunity for this 
kind of frank, no-holds-barred 
conversation. 

I found it very instructive, 
Jackson said. He left Emms 
office and walked slowly back 
to his ship. He was disturbed, 
upset and annoyed. Linguistic in- 
comprehension irked him, no 
matter how comprehensible it 
might be. He should have been 
able to have figured out, some- 
how, how one went about elikat- 
ing mushkies forsically. 

Never mind, he told himself. 
Youll work it out tonight. Jack- 
son baby, and then youll go 
back in there and cannonball 
through them forms. So dont 
get het up over it, man. 

Hed work it out. He damned 
well had to work it out, since he 
had to own a piece of property. 

That was the second part of 
his job. 

E arth had come a long way 
since the bad old days of 
naked, aggressive warfare. Ac- 

183 



cording to the history books, a 
ruler back in those ancient times 
could simply send out his troops 
to seize whatever the ruler want- 
ed. And if any of the folks at 
home had the temerity to ask 
why he wanted it, the ruler 
could have them beheaded, or 
locked up in a dungeon, or sewn 
up in a sack and thrown into the 
sea. And he wouldnt even feel 
guilty about doing any of those 
things because he invariably be- 
lieved that he was right and they 
were wrong. 

This policy, technically called 
the droit de signeur, was one of 
the most remarkable features of 
the laissez fake capitalism which 
the ancients knew. 

But, down the slow passage of 
centuries, cultural processes were 
inexorably at work. A new ethic 
came into the world; and slowly 
but surely, a sense of fair play 
and justices was bred into the 
human race. Rulers came to be 
chosen by ballot, and were re- 
sponsive to the desires of the elec- 
torate. Conceptions of Justices, 
Mercy and Pity came to the 
forefront of mens minds, ameli- 
orating the old law of tooth and 
talon, and amending the savage 
bestiality of the ancient time of 
unreconstruction. 

The old days were gone for- 
ever. Today, no ruler could simp- 
ly take; the voters would never 
stand for it. 

184 



Nowadays one had to have an 
excuse for taking. 

Like for example a Terran citi- 
zen who happened to own pro- 
perty all legal and aboveboard 
on an alien planet, and who urg- 
ently needed and requested Ter- 
ran military assistance in order 
to protect himself, his home, his 
means of a legitimate liveli- 
hood . 

But first he had to own that 
property. He had to really own 
it, to protect himself from the 
bleeding-hearts Congressmen and 
the soft-on-aliens newsmen who 
always started an investigation 
whenever Earth took charge of 
another planet. 

To provide a legal basis for 
conquest  that was what the 
Contactors were for. 

Jackson, Jackson said to 
himself, you gonna sit your- 
self that li'l ole bromicaine fac- 
tory tomorrow and you gonna 
own it without let or hindrance. 
You heah me, boy? I mean it 
sincerely. 

On the morrow, shortly before 
noon, Jackson was back in the 
city. Several hours of intensive 
study, and a long consultation 
with this tutor, had sufficed to 
show him where he had gone 
wrong. 

It was simple enough. He had 
merely been a trifle hasty in 
assuming an extreme and invari- 
ant isolating technique in the 

GALAXY 



IV 



Hon use of radicals. He had 
thought, on the basis of his early 
studies, that word-meaning and 
word-order were the only signifi- 
cant factors required for an un- 
derstanding of the language. But 
that wasnt so. Upon further ex- 
amination, Jackson found that 
the Hon language had some unex- 
pected recourses; affixation, for 
example, and an elementary form 
of reduplication. Yesterday he 
hadnt even been prepared for 
any morphological inconsisten- 
cies; when they had occurred, he 
had found himself in semantic 
difficulties. 

The new forms were easy 
enough to learn. The trouble was, 
they were thoroughly illogical 
and contrary to the entire spirit 

of Hon. 

One word produced by one 
sound, and bearing one meaning 

 that was the rule he had pre- 
viously deduced. But now he dis- 
covered 18 important exceptions 

 compounds produced by a va- 
riety of techniques, each of them 
with a list of modifying suffixes. 
For Jackson, this was as odd as 
stumbling across a grove of palm 
trees in Antarctica. 

He learned the 18 exceptions, 
and thought about the article he 
would write when he finally got 
home. 

And the next day, wiser and 
warier, Jackson strode meaning- 
fully back to the city. 

SHALL WE HAVE A LIHLE TALK? 



I n Emms office, he filled out 
the government forms with 
ease. That first question   
Have you now or at any past 
time, elikated mushkies forsical- 
ly?  he could now answer with 
an honest no. The plural mush- 
kies in its primary meaning, rep- 
resented in this context, the sin- 
gular woman. (The singular 
mushkie used similarly, would 
denote an uncorporeal state of 
femininity.) 

Elikation was, of course, the 
role of sexual termination, unless 
one employed the modifier forsi- 
cally. If one did, this quiet term 
took on a charged meaning in this 
particular context, tantamount 
to edematous polysexual advoca- 
tion. 

Thus, Jackson could honestly 
write that, since he was not a 
Naian, he had never had that par- 
ticular urge. 

It was as simple as that. Jack- 
son was annoyed at himself for 
not having figured it out on his 
own. 

He filled in the rest of the 
questions without difficulty, and 
handed the paper back to Emm. 

Thats really quite skoe, 
Erum said. Now, there are just 
a few more simple items for us 
to complete. The first we can 
do immediately. After that I will 
arrange a brief official ceremony 

185 



for the Property Transferral Act, 
and ttiat will be followed by 
several other small bits of busi- 
ness. All of it should take no 
more than a day or so, and then 
the property will be all yours. 

Sure, kid, thats great, Jack- 
son said. He wasnt bothered by 
the delays. Quite the contrary, 
he had expected many more of 
them. On most other planets, the 
locals caught on quickly to what 
was happening. It took no great 
reasoning power to figure out that 
Earth wanted what she wanted, 
but wanted it in a legalistic man- 
ner. 

As for why she wanted it that 
way  that wasnt too hard to 
fathom, either. A great majority 
of T errans were idealist, and they 
believed fervently in concepts 
such as truth, justice, mercy and 
the like. And not only did they 
believe, they also let those noble 
concepts guide their actions  
except when it would be incon- 
venient or unprofitable. When 
that happened, they acted ex- 
pediently, but continued to talk 
moralistically. This meant that 
they were hypocrites  a term 
which every race has its counter- 
part of. 

Terrans wanted what they 
wanted, but they also wanted 
that what they wanted should 
look nice. This was a lot to ex- 
pect sometimes, especially when 
what they wanted was ownership 
186 



of someone elses planet. But in 
one way or another, they usually 
got it. 

Most alien races realized that 
overt resistance was impossible, 
and resorted to various stalling 
tactics. 

Sometimes they refused to 
sell, or they required an in- 
finite multiplicity of forms, or 
the approval of some local offici- 
al who was always absent. But for 
each ploy the Contactor always 
had a suitable counter-ploy. 

Did they refuse to sell proper- 
ty on racial grounds? The laws of 
Earth specifically forbade such 
practices, and the Declaration of 
Sentient Rights stated the free- 
dom of all sentients to live and 
work wherever they pleased. This 
was a freedom that Terra would 
fight for, if anyone forced them 
to. 

Were they stalling? The Terran 
Doctrine of Temporal Propriety 
would not allow it. 

Was the necessary official ab- 
sent? The Uniform Earth Code 
Against Implicit Sequestration in 
Acts of Omission expressly for- 
bade such a practice . And so 
on and so on. It was a game of 
wits Earth invariably won, since 
the strongest is usually judged 
the cleverest. 

But the Naians werent even 
trying to fight back. Jackson con- 
sidered that downright despic- 
able. 



GALAXY 




'"T^he exchange of Naian cur- 
rency for Terran platinum 
was completed and Jackson was 
given his change in crisp 50-Vrso 
bills. Erum beamed with pleasure, 
and said, Now, Mr. Jackson, we 
can complete todays business if 
you will kindly trombramcthulan- 
chierir in the usual manner. 
Jackson turned, his eyes nar- 
rowed and his mouth compressed 
into a bloodless downward-curv- 
ing line. 

What did you say? 

I merely asked you to   

I know what you asked! But 
what does it mean? 

Well, it means  it means   
Erum laughed weakly.   it 
means exactly what it says. That 
SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK? 



is to say  ethybolically speak- 
ing   

Jackson said in a low, danger- 
ous voice, Give me a synonym. 

There is no synonym, Erum 
said. 

Baby, you better come up 
with one anyhow, Jackson said, 
his hand closing over Erums 
throat. 

Stop! Wait! Ulp! Erum cried. 
Mr. Jackson, I beg of you! How 
can there be a synonym when 
there is one and only one term 
for the thing expressed  if I 
may so express it? 

Youre putting me on! Jack- 
son howled. And you better quit 
it, on account of we got laws 
against willful obfuscation, inten- 

137 



tional obstructionism, implicit 
superimposition and other stuff 
like youre doing. You hear me? 
I hear you, Erum trembled. 
Then hear this: stop agglut- 
inating, you devious dog! Youve 
got a perfectly ordinary run-of- 
the-mill analytical-type langu- 
age, distinguished only by its ex- 
treme isolating tendency. And 
when you got a language like 
that, man, then you simply dont 
agglutinate a lot of big messy 
compounds. Get me? 

Yes, yes, Erum cried. But 
believe me, I dont intend to 
numniscaterate in the slightest! 
Not noniskakkekaki, and you 
really must debruchili that! 
Jackson drew back his fist, but 
got himself under control in time. 
It was unwise to hit aliens if 
there was any possibility that 
they were telling the truth. Folks 
on Terra didnt like it. His pay 
could be docked; and if, by some 
unlucky chance, he killed Erum, 
he could be slapped with a six 
month jail sentence. 

But still . 

 Ill find out if youre lying 
or not! Jackson screamed, and 
stormed out of the office. 

T Te walked for nearly an hour, 
mingling with the crowds in 
the slum quarters of Grath-Eth, 
below the gray, evil-smelling Un- 
gperdis. No one paid any atten- 
tion to him. To all outward ap- 



pearances, he could have been a 
Naian, just as any Naian could 
have been a Terran. 

Jackson located a cheerful sa- 
loon on the corner of Niis and 
Da Streets, and went in. 

It was quiet and masculine in- 
side. Jackson ordered a local 
variety of beer. When it was 
served, he said to the bartender, 
Funny thing happened to me 
the other day. 

Yeah? said the bartender. 

Yeah, really, Jackson said. 
I had this big business deal on, 
see, and then at the last minute 
they asked me to trombramcthu- 
lanchierir in the usual manner. 

He watched the bartenders 
face carefully. A faint expression 
of puzzlement crossed the mans 
stolid features. 

So why didnt you? the bar- 
tender asked. 

You mean you would have? 

Sure I would have. Hell, its 
the standard cathanpriptiaia, 
aint it? 

Course it is, one of the loung- 
ers at the bar said. Unless, of 
course, you suspected they was 
trying to numniscaterate. 

No, I dont think they were 
trying anything like that, Jack- 
son said in a flat low, lifeless 
voice. He paid for his drink and 
started to leave. 

Hey, the bartender called af- 
ter him, You sure they wasnt 
noniskakkekaki ? 



188 



GALAXY 



You never know, Jackson 
said, walking slump-shouldered 
into the street. 

Jackson trusted his instincts, 
both with languages and with 
people. His instincts told him now 
that the Naians were straight, 
and were not practicing an elabo- 
rate deception on him. Erum had 
not been inventing new words for 
the sake of willful confusion. He 
had been really speaking the Hon 
language as he knew it. 

But if that were true, then Na 
was a very strange language. In 
fact, it was down-right eccentric. 
And its implications were not 
merely curious. 

They were disastrous. 

V 

'T^hat evening Jackson went 
back to work. He discovered 
a further class of exceptions 
which he had not known or even 
suspected. That was a group of 
29 multi-valued potentiators. 
These words, meaningless in 
themselves, acted to elicit a com- 
plicated and discordant series of 
shadings from other words. Their 
particular type of potentiation 
varied according to their position 
in the sentence. 

Thus, when Emm had asked 
him to trombramcthulanchierir 
in the usual manner, he had 
merely wanted Jackson to make 
an obligatory ritual obeisance. 

SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK? 



This consisted of clasping his 
hands behind his neck and 
rocking back on his heels. 
He was required to perform 
this action with an expres- 
sion of definite yet modest pleas- 
ure, in accordance with the total- 
ity of the situation, and also in 
accord with the state of his sto- 
mach and nerves and with his re- 
ligion and ethical code, and bear- 
ing in mind minor temperamental 
differences due to fluctuations in 
heat and humidity, and not for- 
getting the virtues of patience, 
similitude and forgiveness. 

It v/as all quite understandable. 
And all completely contradictory 
to everything Jackson had pre- 
viously learned about Hon. 

It was more than contradic- 
tory; it was unthinkable, impos- 
sible, and entirely out of order. 
It was as if, having discovered 
palm trees in frigid Antarctica, 
he had further found that the 
fruit of tiiese trees was, not co- 
conuts, but muscatel grapes. 

It couldnt be  but it was. 

Jackson did what was required 
of him. When he had finished 
trombramcthulanchierering in 
the usual manner, he had only to 
get through the official ceremony 
and the several small require- 
ments after it. 

Erum assured him that it was 
all quite simple, but Jackson sus- 
pected that he might some- 
how have difficulties. 



189 



So, in preparation, he put in 
three days of hard work acquir- 
ing a real mastery of the 29 ex- 
ceptional potentiators, together 
with their most common posi- 
tions, and their potentiating ef- 
fect in each of these positions. 
He finished, bone-weary and with 
his irritability index risen to 
97.3620 on the Grafheimer scale. 
An impartial observer might have 
noticed an ominous gleam in his 
china-blue eyes. 

Jackson had had it. He was 
sick of the Hon language and of 
all things Naian. He had the ver- 
tiginous feeling that the more 
he learned, the less he knew. It 
was downright perverse. 

Hokay, Jackson said, to him- 
self and to the universe at large. 
I have learned the Naian lan- 
gauge, and I have learned a set 
of completely inexplicable excep- 
tions, and I have also learned a 
further and even more contradic- 
tory set of exceptions to the ex- 
ceptions. 

Jackson paused, and in a very 
low voice said; 1 have learned 
an exceptional number of excep- 
tions. Indeed, an impartial ob- 
server might think that this lan- 
guage is composed of nothing 
but exceptions. 

But that he continued, is 
damned well impossible, unthink- 
able and unacceptable. A lan- 
guage is by God and by defini- 
tion systematic, which means its 
19C 



gotta follow some kind of rules. 
Otherwise nobody cant under- 
stand nobody. Thats the way it 
works and thats the way its got- 
ta be. And if anyone thinks they 
can horse around linguisticwise 
with Fred C. Jackson   

Here Jackson paused and drew 
the blaster from his holster. He 
checked the charge, snapped off 
the safety and replaced the wea- 
pon. 

Just better no one give old 
Jackson no more doubletalking, 
old Jackson muttered. Because 
the next alien who tries it is go- 
ing to get a three-inch circle 
drilled through his lousy cheating 
guts. 

So saying, Jackson marched 
back to the city. He was feeling 
decidedly light-headed, but ab- 
solutely determined. His job was 
to steal this planet out from un- 
der its inhabitants in a legal man- 
ner, and in order to do that he 
had to make sense out of their 
language. Therefore, in one way 
or another, he was going to make 
sense. Either that, or he was go- 
ing to make some corpses. 

At this point, he didnt much 
care which. 

prum was in his office, wait- 
ing for him. With him were 
the mayor, the President of the 
City Council, the Borough Presi- 
dent, two aldermen and the Di- 
rector of the Board of Estimates. 

GALAXY 



All of them were smiling  affab- 
ly, albeit nervously. Strong spir- 
its were present on a sideboard, 
and there was a subdued air of 
fellowship in the room. 

All in all, it looked as if Jack- 
son were being welcomed as a 
new and highly respected prop- 
erty owner, an adornment to 
Fakka. Aliens took it that way 
sometimes : made the best of a 
bad bargain by trying to ingrat- 
iate themselves with the Inevit- 
able Earthman. 

Mun, said Emm, shaking his 
hand enthusiastically. 

Same to you, kid, Jackson 
said. He had no idea what the 
word meant. Nor did, he care. He 
had plenty of other Naian words 
to choose among, and he had the 
determination to force matters 
to a conclusion. 

Mun! said the mayor. 

Thanks, pop, said Jackson. 

Mun! declared the other of- 
ficials. 

Glad you boys feel that way, 
said Jackson. He turned to Erum. 
Well, lets get it over with, 
okay? 

Mun-mun-mun, Emm re- 
plied. Mun, mun-mun. 

Jackson stared at him for sev- 
eral seconds. Then he said, in a 
low, controlled voice, Erum, 
baby, just exactly what are you 
trying to say to me? 

Mun, mun, mun, Erum stat- 
ed firmly. Mun, mun mun mun. 
SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK 



Mun mun. He paused, and in a 
somewhat nervous voice asked 
the mayor: Mun, mun? 

Mun . mun mun, the 
mayor replied firmly, and the 
other officials nodded. They all 
turned to Jackson. 

Mun, mun-mun? Erum 
asked him, tremulously, but with 
dignity. 

Jackson was numbed speech- 
less. His face turned a choleric 
red and a large blue vein started 
to pulse in his neck. But he man- 
aged to speak slowly, calmly and 
with infinite menace. 

Just what, he said, do you 
lousy third-rate yokels think 
youre pulling? 

Mun-mun? the mayor asked 
Erum. 

Mun-mun, mun-mun-mun, 
Erum replied quickly, making a 
gesture of incomprehension. 

You better talk sense, Jack- 
son said. His voice was still low, 
but the vein in his neck writhed 
like a firehose under pressure. 

Mun! one of the aldermen 
said quickly to the Borough 
President. 

Mun mun-mun mun? the 
Borough President answered pit- 
eously, his voice breaking on the 
last word. 

So you wont talk sense, 
huh? 

Mun! Mun-mun! the mayor 
cried his face gone ashen with 
fright. 



191 



others looked, and saw 
Jacksons right hand 
clearing the blaster and taking 
aim at Erums chest. 

Quit horsing around! Jack- 
spn commanded. The vein in his 
neck pulsed like a python in 
travail. 

Mun - mun - mun! Erum 
pleaded, dropping to his knees. 

Mun-mun-mun! the mayor 
shrieked, rolling his eyes and 
fainting. 

You get it now, Jackson said 
to Erum. His finger whitened on 
the trigger. 

Erum, his teeth chattering, 
managed to gasp out a strangled 
Mun-mun, mun? But then his 
nerves gave way and he waited 
for death with jaw agape and 
eyes unfocused. 

Jackson took up the last frac- 
tion of slack in the trigger. Then, 
abruptly, he let up and shoved 
the blaster back in its holster. 

Mun, mun! Erum managed 
to say. 

Shaddap, Jackson said. He 
Stepped back and glared at the 
cringing Naian officials. 

He would have dearly loved 
to blast them all. But he couldnt 
do it. Jackson had to come to a 
belated acknowledgement of an 
unacceptable reality. 

His impeccable linguists ear 
had heard, and his polyglot brain 
had analyzed. Dismayingly he 
had realized that the Naians were 
192 



not trying to put anything over 
on him. They were speaking, not 
nonsense, but a true language. 

This language was made up at 
present of the single sound mun. 
This sound could carry an exten- 
sive repei'toire of meanings 
through variations in pitch and 
pattern, changes in stress and 
quantity, alteration of rhythm 
and repetition, and through ac- 
companying gestures and facial 
expressions. 

A language consisting of infin- 
ite variations on a single word! 
Jackson didnt want to believe it, 
but he was too good a linguist to 
doubt the evidence of his own 
trained senses. 

He could learn this language, 
of course. 

But by the time he had learned 
it, what would it have changed 
into? 

J ackson sighed and rubbed his 
face wearily. In a sense it 
was inevitable. All languages 
change. But on Earth and the few 
dozen worlds she had contacted, 
the languages changed with rel- 
ative slowness. 

On Na, the rate of change was 
faster. Quite a bit faster. 

The Na language changed like 
fashions change 'on Earth, only 
faster. It changed like prices 
change or like the weather chang- 
es. It changed endlessly and in- 
cessantly, in accordance with un- 

GALAXY 



known rules and invisible prin- 
ciples. It changed its form like 
an avalanche changes its shape. 
Compared with it, English was 
like a glacier. 

The Na language was, truly 
and monstrously, a simulacrum 
of Heraclituss river. 

You cannot step into the same 
river twice, said Heraclitus: for 
other waters are forever flowing 
on. 

Concerning the language of 
Na, this was simply and literally 
true. 

That made it bad enough. But 
even worse was the fact that an 
observer like Jackson could never 
hope to fix or isolate even one 
term out of the dynamic shifting 
network of terms that composed 
the Na language. For the observ- 
er's action would be gross enough 
by itself to disrupt and alter the 
system, causing it to change un- 
predictably. And so, if the term 
were isolated, its relationship to 
the other terms in the system 
would necessarily be destroyed, 
and the term itself, by definition, 
would be false. 

By the fact of its change, the 
language was rendered imperv- 
ious to codification and control. 
Tlirough indeterminacy, the Na 
longue resisted all attempts to 
coiu|uer it. And Jackson had 
gone from Heraclitus to Heisen- 
berg without touching second 
base. He was dazed and dazzled, 
SHALL WE HAVE A LITTLE TALK? 



'and he looked upon the officials 
with something approaching awe. 

Youve done it, boys, he told 
them. Youve beaten the system. 
Old Earth could swallow you and 
never notice the difference: yoU 
couldnt do a damned thing about 
it. But the folks back home like 
their legalism, and our law says 
that we must be in a state of 
communication as a prior condi- 
tion to any transaction. 

Mun? Erum asked politely. 

So I guess that means I leave 
you folks alone, Jackson said. 
At least, I do as long as they 
keep that law on the books. But 
what the hell, a reprieve 's the 
best anyone can ask for. Eh? 

Mun mun, the mayor said 
hesitantly. 

Ill be getting along now, 
Jackson said. Fairs fair . 
But if I ever find out that you 
Naians were putting one over on 
me   

He left the sentence unfinished. 
Without another word, Jackson 
turned and went back to his ship. 

In half an hour he was space- 
worthy, and fifteen minutes after 
that he was underway. 

VI 

I n Emms office, the officials 
watched while Jacksons 
spaceship glowed like a comet in 
the dark afternoon sky. It dwin- 
dled to a brilliant needle-point, 

193 



and then vanished into the vast- 
ness of space. 

The officials were silent for a 
moment; then they turned and 
looked at each other. Suddenly, 
spontaneously, they burst into 
laughter. Harder and harder they 
laughed, clutching their sides 
while tears rolled down their 
cheeks. 

The mayor was the first to 
check the hysteria. Getting a grip 
on himself he said, Mun, mun, 
mun-mun. 

This thought instantly sobered 
the others. Their mirth died 
away. Uneasily they contemplat- 
ed the distant unfriendly sky, and 
they thought back over their re- 
cent adventures. 

At last young Erum asked, 
Mun-mun? Mun-mun? 

Several of the officials smiled 
at the naivete of the question. 
And yet, none could answer that 
simple yet crucial demand. Why 
indeed? Did anyone dare hazard 
even a guess? 

It was a perplexity leaving in 
doubt not only the future but the 
past as well. And, if a real an- 
swer were unthinkable, then no 
answer at all was surely insup- 
portable. 

The silence grew, and Emms 



young mouth twisted downward 
in premature cynicism. He said 
quite harshly, Mun! Mun-mun! 
Mun? 

His shocking words were no 
more than the hasty cruelty of 
the young; but such a statement | 
could not go unchallenged. And ^ 
the venerable first alderman  
stepped forward to essay a reply. 

Mun mun, mun-mun, the old 
man said, with disarming sim- 
plicity. Mun mun mun-rnun? 
Mun mun-mun-mun. Mun mun 
mun; mun mun mun; mun mun. 
Mun, mun mun mun  mun mun 
mun. Mun-mun? Mun mun mun 
mun! 

This straightforward declara- 
tion of faith pierced Erum to the 
core of his being. Tears sprang 
unanticipated to his eyes. All 
postures forgotten, he turned to 
the sky, clenched his fist and 
shouted, Mun! Mun! Mun- 
mun! 

Smiling serenely, the old aider- 
man murmured, Mun-mun- 
mun; mun, mun-mun. 

This was, ironically enough, ^ 
the marvellous and frightening 
truth of the situation. Perhaps 
it was just as well that the others 
did not hear. 



ROBERT SHECKLEY 



OF GODLIKE POWER by Mack Reynolds 
CATCH A TARTAR by Gordon R. Dickson 
CYCLOPS by Frifz Leiber 
THEORIES WANTED by R. S. Richardson 

all in the September Worlds of Tomorrow, on sale now! 



f 

I 

i 

I 

I 

I 



194 - 



GALAXY 



Worlds of 

SCIENCE 
FICTION 

brings you the finest in science fiction 

Don't delay -send in your subscription order today 
and get the new, better-than-ever MONTHLY issues 
of IF delivered to your door, bringing you stories by 
all your favorites in science fiction! 

KEITH LAUMER 

His celebrated Relief stories and others appear regular!'* 
in IF fast moving, comic yarns of diplomatic skullduggery 
out on tlie frontiers of the stars! 

A. E. VAN VOGT 

Famous author of SLAN and THE WORLD OF NULL  Ap- 
pears often in IF with great new stories like THE EXPEND- 
ABLES, THE SILKIE, THE REPLlCATORS-and many more 
still to come! 

And now  

32 EXTRA PAGES NO INCREASE IN PRICE! 

The Best of the Top Name Writers  

Robert A. Heinlein, Gordon R. Dickson, John Brunner, Hal 
Clement, Lester del Rey contribute to IF. 

 and a Preview of Tomorrow's Best 

I cich issue of IF brings you a brand-new writer, making 
his debut in science fiction in IF, 




SUBSCRIBE 

TODAY! 

Use this order 
blank or order 
by letter but 
dont delay! 



SUBSCRIBE NOW AND SAVE MONEY TOO! 



If' Subscription Department  

421 Hudson Street, New York, N. Y. 1 0014 I 

Yes, send me the next 24 issues ot IF! I enclose $9.50 | 
 New  Renewal | 

Name  

Address ! 

City State Zip No. J 

(Outside of N. and S. America add $1.50 for postage) | 



Olfei void oiler Dec. 31, 1965 



Forgotten road to success in writing 



By J. D. Ratcliff 

T cant imagine why more beginners dont 
take the short road to publication  by 
writing magazine and newspaper articles. 

I've made a good living for 25 years 
writing articles, and I've enjoyed every 
minute of it. Ive interviewed Nobel Prize 
winners and heads of state. Ive covered 
stories from Basel to Bangkok to Buffalo. 

Its a great life. No commuter trains to 
catch, no office routine. Whether Im at 
home or abroad on a.ssignment, I write 
from eight to noon every day  no more, 
no less. My afternoons are my own. 

The market for articles is vast and hun- 
gry. Over 350,000 were sold last year to 
magazines alone. Editors want pieces on 
almost any subject that comes natural to 
you  but they demand that your writing 
be sound and professional. 

To teach professional writing techniques 
to serious beginners, I joined with Rod 
Serling, Faith Baldwin, Bennett Cerf, and 
eight other leading authors to start the 
Famous Writers School. 

We poured everything we know about 
successful writing into a new kind of 
course which trains you at home, in spare 
time. You begin with the fundamentals of 
all good writing. Then, you specialize in 
articles and other non-fiction. (Or in Fic- 
tion, Advertising or Business Writing.) 

You learn to write hy wriiinf. Our in- 
structors, themselves all published au- 
thors, work with you by mail much as 
editors do with established writers. 

Our School is young. Yet students, many 
still in training, have broken into print in 
more than 60 publications. Several sold 
pieces they wrote as School assignments. 



Writing Aptitude Test offered 

To find out if you too can be a published 
writer, send for the Schools revealing Apti- 
tude Test. If you test well  or olTer other 
evidence of writing ability you may enroll. 
However, there is no obligation to do so. 





"Jack" Ratcliff is one of Aninica's higlicst paid 
free-lance writers. Although he work.s only 
four hours a day. he has h;id hundreds of articles 
published in top ni;i|Ul/ine.s, including over 
lot) in KctiiUr's DifiC.s! alone. 



Famous Writers School 

Dept. 66K7, Westport Connecticut t)(iSK I 
I want (o know if J liave wriliiu, apiiiiule. 
IMcase mail me. without obliealitHi, voiii 
Aptitiuic Jest and 48-pa[:e In ocluii r. 



Mr, 

Mrs A tie 

Miss ( please |n iiil ) 

Street 

City Zone. 

County State. 



The Seliool is accredited by the Aectedilinp. 
C'ommission of tlic Natiunid Home Sliitiv 
Council, Washiiiyion. D.C.THE FIRE PEOPLE
By RAY CUMMINGS

CONTENTS

   CHAPTER I.       THE COMING OF THE LIGHT.
   CHAPTER II.      THE UNKNOWN ENEMY.
   CHAPTER III.     THE LANDING OF THE INVADERS.
   CHAPTER IV.      THE MEETING.
   CHAPTER V.       CAPTURED!
   CHAPTER VI.      MIELA.
   CHAPTER VII.     THE MERCUTIAN CAMP.
   CHAPTER VIII.    THE ESCAPE.
   CHAPTER IX.      FUTILE ATTACKS.
   CHAPTER X.       MIELA'S STORY.
   CHAPTER XI.      TO SAVE THE WORLD.
   CHAPTER XII.     THE LANDING ON MERCURY.
   CHAPTER XIII.    THE CAPTIVE EARTH-MAN.
   CHAPTER XIV.     THE RULER OF THE LIGHT COUNTRY.
   CHAPTER XV.      THE MOUNTAIN CONCLAVE.
   CHAPTER XVI.     THE FIRE PLANET.
   CHAPTER XVII.    THE FIGHT AT THE BAYOU.
   CHAPTER XVIII.   REVOLUTION.
   CHAPTER XIX.     THE NEW RULER.
   CHAPTER XX.      IN THE TWILIGHT COUNTRY.
   CHAPTER XXI.     ANOTHER LIGHT-RAY!
   CHAPTER XXII.    THE THEFT OF THE LIGHT-RAY.
   CHAPTER XXIII.   THE STROM.
   CHAPTER XXIV.    THE WATER CITY.
   CHAPTER XXV.     PREPARATIONS FOR WAR.
   CHAPTER XXVI.    THE BATTLE.
   CHAPTER XXVII.   THE SIEGE OF THE LONE CITY.
   CHAPTER XXVIII.  THE END OF TAO.
   CHAPTER XXIX.    THE RETURN.

CHAPTER I.

THE COMING OF THE LIGHT.

The first of the new meteors landed on the earth in November, 1940. It was
discovered by a farmer in his field near Brookline, Massachusetts, shortly
after daybreak on the morning of the 11th. Astronomically, the event was
recorded by the observatory at Harvard as the sudden appearance of what
apparently was a new star, increasing in the short space of a few hours
from invisibility to a power beyond that of the first magnitude, and then
as rapidly fading again to invisibility. This star was recorded by two of
the other great North American observatories, and by one in the Argentine
Republic. That it was comparatively small in mass and exceedingly close to
the earth, even when first discovered, was obvious. All observers agreed
that it was a heavenly body of an entirely new order.

The observatory at Harvard supplemented its account by recording the
falling, just before dawn of the 11th, of an extraordinarily brilliant
meteor that flamed with a curious red and green light as it entered the
earth's atmosphere. This meteor did not burn itself out, but fell, still
retaining its luminosity, from a point near the zenith, to the horizon.

What the farmer saw was a huge fire burning near the center of his field.
It was circular in form and about thirty feet in diameter. He was
astonished to see it there, but what surprised him more was its peculiar
aspect.

It was still the twilight of dawn when he reached the field. He beheld the
fire first from a point several hundred yards away. As he explained it,
the light--for it was more aptly described as a light than a
fire--extended in parallel rays from the ground directly upward into the
sky. He could see no line of demarkation where it ended at the top. It
seemed to extend into the sky an infinite distance. It was, in fact, as
though an enormous searchlight were buried in his field, casting its beam
of light directly upward.

But more than all this, the farmer was struck by the extraordinary color
of the light. At the base it was a deep, solid green. This green color
extended upward for perhaps fifty feet, then it shaded into red. The
farmer noticed, too, that the fire did not leap and dance with flames, but
seemed rather to glow--a steady light like the burning of colored powder.
In the morning half-light it threw a weird, unearthly reddish-green glow
over the field.

The farmer approached to within twenty feet of the light. He looked to see
what was burning, but could not determine, for the greenish base extended
directly down into the ground. He noticed also that it gave out
extraordinarily little heat. The morning was not exceptionally cold, yet
he stood within twenty feet of the fire without discomfort.

I was on the staff of the Boston _Observer_ at this time. I reached
Brookline about noon of the 11th of November, and went directly to the
field where the fire was burning. Nearly a thousand people were there,
watching.

By daylight the fire still held its green and red color, although its
light was much less intense. It held its characteristic shape. Though
clearly definable, under the rays of the sun it became quite transparent.
Looking through it, I could see plainly the crowd of people on the farther
side of the field. The effect was similar to looking through a faintly
tinted glass, except that now I noticed that the light had a sort of
crawling motion, like the particles of a heavy fog. The fire came from a
hole in the ground; by daylight now the hole could be seen plainly.

For some moments I stood silent, awestruck by this extraordinary
spectacle. Then a man standing beside me remarked that there was no smoke.
I had not thought of that before, but it was true--indeed, the fire
appeared phosphorescent.

"Let's get up closer," said the man beside me.

Together we walked to within ten feet of the outer edge of the fire. We
could feel its heat now, although it was not uncomfortable except when it
beat directly on our faces. Standing so close, we could see down into the
hole from which the light emanated.

Lying at the bottom of the hole, perhaps ten feet below the surface, I saw
the jagged top of an enormous gray sphere, burned and pitted. This was the
meteor--nearly thirty feet in diameter--that in its fall had buried itself
deep in the loam of the field.

As we stood there looking down into the hole some one across from us
tossed in a ball of paper. It seemed to hang poised a moment, then it
shriveled up, turned black, and floated slowly down until it rested on top
of the sphere.

Some one else threw a block of wood about a foot long into the hole. I
could see it as it struck the top of the sphere. It lay there an instant;
then it, too, turned black and charred, but it did not burst into flame.

The man beside me plucked at my sleeve. "Why don't it burn?" he asked.

I shook myself loose.

"How should I know?" I answered impatiently.

I found myself trembling all over with an unreasoning fear, for there was
something uncanny about the whole affair. I went back to Brookline soon
after that to send in the story and do some telephoning. When I got back
to the field I saw a man in front of me carrying a pail of water. I fell
into step beside him.

"What do you suppose it'll do?" he asked as we walked along.

"God knows," I answered. "Try it."

But when we got down into the field we found the police authorities in
charge. The crowd was held back now in a circle, a hundred yards away from
the light. After some argument we got past the officials, and, followed by
two camera men and a motion-picture man who bobbed up from nowhere, walked
out across the cleared space toward the light. We stopped about six or
eight feet from the edge of the hole; the heat was uncomfortably intense.

"I'll make a dash for it," said the man with the pail.

He ran forward a few steps, splashed the water into the light, and hastily
retreated. As the water struck the edge of the light there came a roar
like steam escaping under tremendous pressure; a great cloud of vapor
rolled back over us and dissolved. When the air cleared I saw that the
light, or the fire of this mysterious agency, was unchanged. The water
dashed against it had had absolutely no effect.

It was just after this incident that the first real tragedy happened. One
of the many quadruplanes that had been circling over the field during the
afternoon passed directly over the light at an altitude of perhaps three
thousand feet. We saw it sail away erratically, as though its pilot no
longer had it under control. Then it suddenly burst into flame and came
quivering down in a long, lengthening spiral of smoke.

That night the second of the meteors landed on the earth. It fell near
Juneau, Alaska, and was accompanied by the same phenomena as the one we
were watching. The reports showed it to be slightly smaller in size than
the Brookline meteor. It burned brightly during the day of November 12.
On the morning of the 13th wireless reports from Alaska stated that it had
burned out during the previous night.

Meanwhile the light at Brookline was under constant surveillance. It
remained unchanged in all respects.

The next night it rained--a heavy, pelting downpour. For a mile or more
around the field the hissing of steam could be heard as the rain struck
the light. The next morning was clear, and still we saw no change in the
light.

Then, a week later, came the cold spell of 1940. Surpassing in severity
the winters of 1888 and 1918, it broke all existing records of the Weather
Bureau. The temperature during the night of November 20, at Brookline,
fell to thirty degrees below zero. During this night the fire was seen to
dwindle gradually in size, and by morning it was entirely extinguished.

No other meteors fell that winter; and, as their significance remained
unexplained, public interest in them soon died out. The observatories at
Harvard, Flagstaff, Cordoba, and the newer one on Table Mountain, near
Cape Town, all reported the appearance of several new stars, flaring into
prominence for a few hours and visible just after sunset and before dawn,
on several nights during November. But these published statements were
casually received and aroused only slight general comment.

Then, in February, 1941, came the publication of Professor Newland's
famous theory of the Mercutian Light--as the fire was afterward known.
Professor Newland was at this time the foremost astronomer in America, and
his extraordinary theory and the predictions he made, coming from so
authoritative a source, amazed and startled the world.

His paper, couched in the language of science, was rewritten to the public
understanding and published in the newspapers of nearly every country. It
was an exhaustive scientific deduction, explaining in theory the origin of
the two meteors that had fallen to earth two months before.

In effect Professor Newland declared that the curious astronomical
phenomena of the previous November--the new "stars" observed, the two
meteors that had fallen with their red and green light-fire--were all
evidence of the existence of intelligent life on the planet Mercury.

I give you here only the more important parts of the paper as it was
rewritten for the public prints:

    ... I am therefore strongly inclined to accept the theory advanced by
    Schiaparelli in 1882, in which he concluded that Mercury rotates on
    its axis once in eighty-eight days. Now, since the sidereal revolution
    of Mercury, _i.e._, its complete revolution around the sun, occupies
    only slightly under eighty-eight days, the planet always presents the
    same face to the sun. On that side reigns perpetual day; on the
    other--the side presented to the earth as Mercury passes us--perpetual
    night.

    The existence of an atmospheric envelope on Mercury, to temper the
    extremes of heat and cold that would otherwise exist on its light and
    dark hemispheres, seems fairly certain. If there were no atmosphere on
    the planet, temperatures on that face toward the sun would be
    extraordinarily high--many hundred degrees hotter than the boiling
    point of water.

    Quite the other extreme would be the conditions on the dark side, for
    without the sheltering blanket of an atmosphere, this surface must be
    exposed to the intense cold of interplanetary space.

    I have reason to believe, however, particularly from my deductions
    made in connection with the photographs taken during the transit of
    Mercury over the face of the sun on November 11 last, that there does
    exist an atmosphere on this planet--an atmosphere that appears to be
    denser and more cloudy than our own. I am led to this conclusion by
    other evidence that has long been fairly generally accepted as fact.
    The terminating edge of the phases of Mercury is not sharp, but
    diffuse and shaded--there is here an atmospheric penumbra. The
    spectroscope also shows lines of absorption, which proves that Mercury
    has a gaseous envelope thicker than ours.

    This atmosphere, whatever may be its nature I do not assume, tempers
    the heat and cold on Mercury to a degree comparable to the earth. But
    I do believe that it makes the planet--on its dark face
    particularly--capable of supporting intelligent life of some form.

    Mercury was in transit over the face of the sun on November 11, of
    last year, within a few hours of the time the first meteor fell to
    earth. The planet was therefore at one of her closest points to the
    earth, and--this is significant--was presenting her _dark face_ toward
    us.

    At this time several new "stars" were reported, flashing into
    brilliancy and then fading again into obscurity. All were observed in
    the vicinity of Mercury; none appeared elsewhere. I believe these
    so-called "stars" to be some form of interplanetary vehicle--probably
    navigated in space by beings from Mercury. And from them were launched
    the two meteors that struck our planet. How many others were
    dispatched that may have missed their mark we have no means of
    determining.

    The days around November 11 last, owing to the proximity of Mercury to
    the earth, were most favorable for such a bombardment. A similar time
    is now once more almost upon us!

    Because of the difference in the velocities of Mercury and the earth
    in their revolutions around the sun, one synodic revolution of
    Mercury, _i.e._, from one inferior conjunction to the next, requires
    nearly one hundred and sixteen days. In eighty-eight days Mercury has
    completed her sidereal revolution, but during that time the earth has
    moved ahead a distance requiring twenty-eight days more before she can
    be overtaken.

    After the first week in March of this year therefore Mercury will
    again be approaching inferior conjunction, and again will pass at her
    closest point to the earth.

    We may expect at this time another bombardment of a severity that may
    cause tremendous destruction, or destroy entirely life on this planet!



CHAPTER II.


THE UNKNOWN ENEMY.


When, in February, 1941, Professor James Newland issued this remarkable
statement, my paper sent me at once to interview him. He was at this time
at the head of the Harvard observatory staff. He lived with his son and
daughter in Cambridge. His wife was dead. I had been acquainted with the
professor and his family for some time. I first met his son, Alan, during
our university days at Harvard. We liked each other at once, and became
firm friends--possibly because we were such opposite physical types, as
sometimes happens.

Alan was tall, lean and muscular--an inch or so over six feet--with the
perfect build of an athlete. I am dark; Alan was blond, with short, curly
hair, and blue eyes. His features were strong and regular. He was, in
fact, one of the handsomest men I have ever seen. And yet he acted as
though he didn't know it--or if he did, as though he considered it a
handicap. I think what saved him was his ingenious, ready smile, and his
retiring, unassuming--almost diffident--manner.

At the time of the events I am describing Alan was twenty-two--about two
years younger than I. It was his first year out of college. He had taken a
scientific course and intended to join his father's staff.

Beth and Alan were twins. I was tremendously interested in Beth even then.
She seemed one of the most worth-while girls I had ever met. She was a
little wisp of femininity, slender and delicate, hardly more than five
feet one or two. She had beautiful golden hair and an animated, pretty
face, with a pert little snub nose. She was a graduate of Vassar, and
planned to take up chemistry as a profession, for she had the same
scientific bent as her father and brother.

I called upon Professor Newland the evening of the day his statement was
published, and found all three discussing it.

"You want me to talk for publication, don't you, Bob Trevor?" the
professor asked suddenly, after we had exchanged a few pleasantries.

He was a wiry little man, about sixty, smooth-shaven, with sparse gray
hair, a rugged face of strong character, and a restless air of energy
about him. He was an indefatigable worker; indeed, I am confident that,
for any single continuous period of work without sleep, he could have run
Alan and me into the ground and still have been comparatively fresh.

"You want an exclusive follow-up story from me to-night, don't you?" he
repeated.

I admitted that I did.

"What you'll get won't be just what you expect. Look at this."

He pulled one of the evening papers toward him vigorously. "They think it
is humorous. There--read that."

The item to which he pointed was a sprightly account of the weird beings
that might shortly arrive from Mercury.

"They think it's a joke--some of them. There's another--read that."

The attitude of the press was distinctly an inclination to treat the
affair from the humorous side. I had seen indications of that during the
day at the office.

"Look here, Bob"--the professor swept all the papers aside with his hand.
"You put it to them this way. Make them see this is not a prediction of
the end of the world. We've had those before--nobody pays any attention to
them, and rightly so. But this Mercutian Light is more than a theory--it's
a fact. We fought it last November, and we'll have to fight it again next
month. That's what I want to make them realize."

"They'll think it is worth being serious about," Alan put in, "if one of
those lights drop into Boston or New York--especially if it happens to
play in a horizontal direction instead of vertical."

We went into the whole subject thoroughly, and the professor gave me a
second signed statement in which he called upon the nations of the world
to prepare for the coming peril.

The actual characteristics of the Mercutian Light we had discussed before
several times. A good deal had been printed about it during the previous
December--without, as I have said, attracting much public attention. The
two meteors had been examined. They were found to be of a mineral that
could have originated on Mercury. They were burned and pitted like other
meteorites by their passage through the earth's atmosphere.

Of the light itself Professor Newland had already given his opinion. It
was, he said, some unknown form of etheric vibration. It radiated heat
very slightly, but it had the peculiarity of generating intense heat in
anything it touched directly.

"You'd better explain that, father," said Beth, when we reached this point
in our summary that evening.

"Heat is the vibration of molecules of matter," the professor began.

I nodded.

"Make it clear when you write it up, Bob," Alan put in. "It's like this.
All molecules are in motion--the faster the motion, the hotter the
substance, and vice versa."

"And this Mercutian Light," Beth added, "has the power of enormously
increasing the molecular vibration of anything it comes in contact with--"

"But it doesn't radiate much heat itself," Alan finished.

Professor Newland smiled. "The old man doesn't have much of a show, does
he?"

Alan sat down somewhat abashed, but Beth remained standing beside her
father, listening intently to everything he said.

"This light I conceive to be the chief weapon of warfare of the
Mercutians," the professor went on. "There has been some talk of those two
meteors being signals. That's all nonsense. They were not signals--they
were missiles. It was an act of aggression."

I tried to get him to give some idea of what the inhabitants of Mercury
might be like, for that was what my editor chiefly desired.

At first he would say nothing along those lines.

"That is pure speculation," he explained. "And very easy speculation, too.
Any one can allow his imagination to run wild and picture strange beings
of another world. I don't predict they will actually land on the
earth--and I have no idea what they will look like if they do land. As a
matter of fact, they will probably look very much like ourselves. I see no
reason to doubt it."

"Like us?" I ejaculated.

"Why not?" said Alan. "Conditions on Mercury are not fundamentally
different from here. We don't have to conceive any very extraordinary sort
of being to fill them."

"Here's what you can tell your paper," said the professor abruptly. "Take
it down."

I took out my notebook, and he dictated briskly.

"Regarding the possible characteristics of inhabitants of Mercury, it is
my conception that intelligent life--let us say, human life--wherever it
exists in our universe does not greatly differ in character from that of
our own planet. Mars, Venus, Mercury, even Neptune, are relatively close.
I believe the Creator has constructed all human life on the same general
plan.

"I believe that, being neighbors--if I may be permitted the expression--it
is intended that intercourse between the planets should take place. That
we have been isolated up to the present time is only because of our
ignorance--our inability to bridge the gap. I believe that migration,
friendship, commerce, even war, between the inhabitants of different
planets of our solar system was intended by Almighty God--and, in good
time, will come to pass.

"This is not science; and yet science does not contradict it, in my
opinion. Human life on Mercury, Venus or Mars may need bodies taller,
shorter, heavier, lighter, more fragile or more solid than ours. The
organs will differ from ours, perhaps, but not materially so. The senses
will be the same.

"In a word, I believe that nearly all the range of diversity of human life
existing on any of the planets exists now on this earth, or has existed in
the past, or will exist in the future through our own development, or at
most the differences would not be greater than a descent into our animal
kingdom would give us.

"Mercutians may have the sense of smell developed to the point of a dog;
the instinct of direction of the homing pigeon; the eyes of a cat in the
dark, or an owl in the light; but I cannot conceive of them being so
different that similar illustrations would not apply.

"I believe the Creator intends intercourse of some kind, friendly or
unfriendly, to take place between the worlds. As China was for centuries,
so for eons we of this earth have been isolated. That time is past. The
first act was one of aggression. Let us wait for the next calmly but
soberly, with full realization of the danger. For we may be--indeed, I
think we are--approaching the time of greatest peril that human life on
this earth has ever had to face!"



CHAPTER III.


THE LANDING OF THE INVADERS.


March 8, 1941, was the date at which Mercury was again to be in inferior
conjunction--at her closest point to the earth since her transit over the
face of the sun on November 11 of the previous year. During
February--after Professor Newland's statements--the subject received a
tremendous amount of publicity. Some scientific men rallied to Professor
Newland's support; others scouted the idea as absurd.

Officially, the governments of the world ignored the matter entirely. In
general, the press, editorially, wrote in a humorous vein, conjuring up
many ridiculous possibilities of what was about to happen. The public
followed this lead. It was amused, interested to a degree; but, as a mass,
neither apprehensive nor serious--only curious.

In some parts of the earth--among the smaller Latin nations
particularly--some apprehension was felt. But even so, no one knew what to
do about it--where to go to avoid the danger--for the attack, if it came
at all, was as likely to strike one country as another.

The first week in March arrived with public interest steadily increasing.
Mercury, always difficult of observation, presented no spectacle for the
public gaze and imagination to feed upon. But, all over the world, there
were probably more eyes turned toward the setting and rising sun during
that week than ever had been turned there before.

Professor Newland issued no more statements after that evening I have
described. He was taken with a severe cold in the latter part of February,
and as Beth was in delicate health and did not stand the Northern winters
well, the whole family left for a few months' stay at their bungalow home
in Florida. They were quite close to the little village of Bay Head, on
the Gulf coast. I kept in communication with them there.

The 8th of March came and passed without a report from any part of the
earth of the falling of the Mercutian meteors. Satirical comment in the
press doubled. There was, indeed, no scientific report of any unusual
astronomical phenomena, except from the Harvard observatory the following
morning. There Professor Newland's assistant, Professor Brighton, stated
he had again observed a new "star"--an interplanetary vehicle, as
Professor Newland described it. Only a single one had been observed this
time. It was seen just before dawn of the 9th.

Then, about 4 P.M., Atlantic time, on the afternoon of the 9th, the world
was electrified by the report of the landing of invaders in the United
States. The news came by wireless from Billings, Montana. An
interplanetary vehicle of huge size had landed on the desert in the
Shoshone River district of northern Wyoming, west of the Big Horn
Mountains.

This strange visitor--it was described as a gleaming, silvery object
perhaps a hundred feet in diameter--had landed near the little Mormon
settlement of Byron. The hope that its mission might be friendly was
dispelled even in the first report from Billings. The characteristic red
and green light-fire had swept the country near by--a horizontal beam this
time--and the town of Byron was reported destroyed, and in all likelihood
with the loss of its entire population.

The Boston _Observer_ sent me to Billings almost immediately by
quadruplane. I arrived there about eight o'clock on the evening of the
10th. The city was in a turmoil. Ranchers from the neighboring cattle
country thronged its streets. A perfect exodus of people--Mormons and oil
men from Shoshone country, almost the entire populations of Cody, Powell,
Garland, and other towns near the threatened section, the Indians from the
Crow Reservation at Frannie--all were streaming through Billings.

The Wyoming State Airplane Patrol, gathered in a squadron by orders from
Cheyenne, occasionally passed overhead, flashing huge white searchlights.
I went immediately to the office of the Billings _Dispatch_. It was so
crowded I could not get in. From what I could pick up among the excited,
frightened people of Billings, and the various bulletins that the
_Dispatch_ had sent out during the day, the developments of the first
twenty-four hours of Mercutian invasion were these:

Only a single "vehicle"--we called it that for want of a better name--had
landed. Airplane observation placed its exact position on the west bank of
the Shoshone River, about four miles southwest of Byron and the same
distance southeast of Garland. The country here is typically that of the
Wyoming desert--sand and sagebrush--slightly rolling in some places, with
occasional hills and buttes.

The Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad runs down its spur from the
Northern Pacific near Billings, passes through the towns of Frannie--near
the border of Montana and Wyoming--and Garland, and terminates at Cody.
This line, running special trains throughout the day, had brought up a
large number of people. During the afternoon a bomb of some kind--it was
vaguely described as a variation of the red and green light-rays--had
destroyed one of the trains near Garland. The road was now open only down
to Frannie.

The town of Byron, I learned, was completely annihilated. It had been
swept by the Mercutian Light and destroyed by fire. Garland was as yet
unharmed. There was broken country between it and the Mercutian invaders,
and the rays of the single light which they were using could not reach it
directly.

Such, briefly, was the situation as I found it that evening of the 10th.
In Billings we were sixty-five miles north of the Mercutian landing place.
What power for attack and destruction the enemy had, we had no means of
determining. How many of them there were; how they could travel over the
country; what the effective radius of their light-fire was; the nature of
the "bomb" that had destroyed the train on the C., B. and Q. near the town
of Garland--all those were questions that no one could answer.

Billings was, during those next few days, principally a gathering place
and point of departure for refugees. Yet, so curiously is the human mind
constituted, underneath all this turmoil the affairs of Billings went on
as before. The stores did not close; the Billings _Dispatch_ sent out its
reports; the Northern Pacific trains from east and west daily brought
their quota of reporters, picture men and curiosity seekers, and took away
all who had sense enough to go. The C., B. and Q. continued running trains
to Frannie--which was about fifteen miles from the Mercutian landing
place--and many of the newspaper men, most of those, in fact, who did not
have airplanes, went there.

That first evening in Billings, Rolland Mercer--a chap about my own age,
who had brought me from the East in one of the Boston _Observer's_
planes--and I, decided on a short flight about the neighboring country to
look the situation over. We started about midnight, a crisp, cloudless
night with no moon. We had been warned against venturing into the danger
zone; several of the Wyoming patrol and numbers of private planes had been
seen to fall in flames when the light struck them.

We had no idea what the danger zone was--how close we dared go--but
decided to chance it. To fly sufficiently high for safety directly over
the Mercutians appeared difficult, since the light-fire already had proven
effective at a distance of several miles at least. We decided not to
attempt that, but merely to follow the course of the C., B. and Q.
southwest to Cody, then to circle around to the east, and thence back
north to Billings, passing well to the east of the Mercutians.

We started, as I have said, about midnight, rising from the rolling
prairie back of Billings. We climbed five hundred feet and, with our
searchlight playing upon the ground beneath, started directly for Frannie.
We passed over Frannie at about eight hundred feet, and continued on the
C., B. and Q. line toward Garland. We had decided to pass to a
considerable extent to the west of Garland, to be farther away from the
danger, and then to strike down to Cody.

We were flying now at a speed close to a hundred and forty miles an hour.
Off to the left I could see the red and green beam of the single light of
the Mercutians; it was pointing vertically up into the air, motionless.
Something--I do not know what--made me decide to turn off our searchlight.

I looked behind us. Some miles away, and considerably nearer the
Mercutians than we were, I saw the light of another plane. I was watching
it when suddenly the red and green beam swung toward it, and a moment
later picked it up. I caught a fleeting glimpse of what I took to be a
little biplane. It remained for an instant illuminated by the weird red
and green flare; then the Mercutian Light swung back to its vertical
position. A second later the biplane burst into flames and fell.

The thing left me shuddering. I turned our searchlight permanently off and
sat staring down at the shadowy country scurrying away beneath us.

Mercer had evidently not seen this tragedy. He did not look at me, but
kept facing the front. We were now somewhat to the west of Garland, with
it between us and the Mercutians. The few lights of the town could be seen
plainly. The country beneath us seemed fairly level. To the west, half a
mile away, perhaps, I could make out a sheer, perpendicular wall of rock.
We seemed to be flying parallel with it and about level with its top.

We were rising a little, I think, when suddenly our engines stopped. I
remember it flashed through my mind to wonder how Mercer would dare shut
them off when we were flying so low. The sudden silence confused me a
little. I started to ask him if he had seen the biplane fall, when he
swung back abruptly and gripped me by the arm.

"Turn on the light--you fool--we've got to land!"

I fumbled with the searchlight. Then, just as I turned the switch, I saw,
rising from a point near the base of the Mercutian Light, what appeared to
be a skyrocket.

It rose in a long, graceful arc, reached the top of its ascent, and came
down, still flaming. I remember deciding it would fall in or near Garland.

It seemed to go out just before it landed--at least I did not follow it
all the way down. Then there came a flash as though a huge quantity of red
and green smokeless powder had gone off in a puff; a brief instant of
darkness, and then flames rose from a hundred points in the little town.
The next second our wheels ground in the sand.

I heard a splintering crash; something struck me violently on the
shoulder; then--blackness.



CHAPTER IV.


THE MEETING.


Professor Newland and his family were living in seclusion in their Florida
home at the time the Mercutian invaders landed in Wyoming. The curious
events in Florida, which connected them so directly with the invasion and
caused Alan later to play so vital a part in it, are so important that I
am impelled to relate them chronologically, rather than as they were told
me afterward by Alan and Beth.

When, on March 9, the news that the Mercutians had landed in Wyoming
reached Professor Newland, he immediately established telegraphic
communication with Harvard. Thus he was kept fully informed on the
situation--indeed, he saw it as a whole far better than I did.

On March 12, three days after the landing, orders from Washington were
given out, regulating all passenger transportation in the direction of the
danger zone. One hundred miles was the limit set. State troops were placed
on all trains, State roads were likewise guarded, and the State airplane
patrols united in a vigilant effort to keep outside planes from getting
in. On the 13th the President of the United States issued an appeal to all
persons living within the hundred-mile limit, asking them to leave.

On March 14 the Canadian government offered its assistance in any way
possible--its Saskatchewan airplane patrol was already helping Montana
maintain the hundred-mile limit. Similar offers were immediately made by
nearly every government in the world.

Such were the first main steps taken to safeguard the people.

By March 14 the actual conditions of affairs in the threatened section of
Wyoming was fairly well known. The town of Garland was destroyed by fire
on the night of the 10th, and the towns of Mantua and Powell--north and
south of Garland respectively--the following morning. On the evening of
the 11th a government plane, flying without lights, sacrificed itself in
an attempt to drop a bomb into the Mercutian camp. It was caught by the
light when almost directly over the Mercutians, and was seen to fall in
flames.

It was estimated that the single light was controlling an area with a
radius of about ten miles. To the south and west there was practically
nothing but desert. To the west Garland, Mantua and Powell were burned. To
the north Deaver and Crowley--on another branch of the C., B. and Q.,
about ten miles from the Mercutians--were as yet unharmed. They were,
however, entirely deserted by the 15th.

During these days the Mercutians did not move from their first landing
place. Newspaper speculation regarding their capabilities for offensive
action ran rife. Perhaps they could not move. They appeared to possess but
one ray of light-fire; this had an effective radius of ten miles. The only
other offensive weapon shown was the rocket, or bomb, that had destroyed
the C., B. and Q. train near Garland and the town itself. Reports differed
as to what had set fire to the town of Powell.

All these points were less than ten miles away from the Mercutian base.
Obviously, then, the danger was grossly exaggerated. The unknown invaders
could safely and easily be shelled by artillery from a much greater
distance. Mercury had passed inferior conjunction; no other Mercutian
vehicles had been reported as landing anywhere on the earth. A few days,
and the danger would be over. Thus the newspapers of the country settled
the affair.

On March 14th it was announced that General Price would conduct the
military operations against the Mercutians. Press dispatches
simultaneously announced that troops, machine guns and artillery were
being rushed to Billings. This provoked a caustic comment from the
Preparedness League of America, to the effect that no military operations
of any offensive value could be conducted by the United States against
anybody or anything.

This statement was to some extent true. During the twenty years that had
elapsed since the World War armament of all kinds had fallen into disuse.
Few improvements in offensive weapons had been made. The military
organization and equipment of the United States, and, indeed, that of many
of the other great powers, was admittedly inadequate to cope with any very
powerful enemy.

Professor Newland telegraphed to the War Department at Washington on the
14th, stating that in his opinion new scientific measures would have to be
devised to deal with this enemy, and that whatever scientific knowledge he
had on the subject was at their disposal at their request. To this
telegram the government never replied.

It was a day or two after that--on the morning of the 16th, to be
exact--that the next most important development in this strange affair
took place. Alan Newland rose that morning at dawn and took his launch for
a trip up one of the neighboring bayous. He was alone, and intended to
fish for an hour or so and return home in time for breakfast.

He went, perhaps, three miles up the winding little stream. Then, just
after sunrise, he shut off the motor and drifted silently along. The bayou
split into two streams here, coming together again a quarter of a mile
farther on, and thus forming a little island. It was just past the point
of this island that Alan shut off his motor.

He had been sitting quiet several minutes preparing his tackle, when his
eye caught something moving behind the dark green of the magnolia trees
hanging over the low banks of the island. It seemed to be a flicker of red
and white some five feet above the ground. Instinctively he reached for
the little rifle he had brought with him to shoot at it, thinking it might
be a bird, although he had never seen one before of such a color.

A moment later, in the silence, he heard a rustling of the palmettos near
the bank of the bayou. He waited, quiet, with the rifle across his knees.
His launch was still moving forward slowly from the impetus of the motor.
And then, quite suddenly, he came into sight of the figure of a girl
standing motionless beside a tree on the island a few feet back from the
water and evidently watching him.

Alan was startled. He knew there was no one living on the island. There
were, in fact, few people at all in the vicinity--only an occasional negro
shack or the similar shack of the "poor white trash," and a turpentine
camp, several miles back in the pines.

But it was not the presence of the girl here on the island at daybreak
that surprised him most, but the appearance of the girl herself. He sat
staring at her dumbly, wondering if he were awake or dreaming. For the
girl--who otherwise might have appeared nothing more than an
extraordinarily beautiful young female of this earth, somewhat
fantastically dressed--the girl had wings!

He rubbed his eyes and looked again. There was no doubt about it--they
were huge, deep-red feathered wings, reaching from her shoulder blades
nearly to the ground. She took a step away from the tree and flapped them
once or twice idly. Alan could see they would measure nearly ten feet from
tip to tip when outstretched. His launch had lost its forward motion now,
and for the moment was lying motionless in the sluggish bayou. Hardly
fifty feet separated him from the girl.

Her eyes stared into his for a time--a quiet, curious stare, with no hint
of fear in it. Then she smiled. Her lips moved, but the soft words that
reached him across the water were in a language he could not understand.
But he comprehended her gesture; it distinctly bade him come ashore. Alan
took a new grip on himself, gathered his scattered wits, and tried to
think connectedly.

He laid his rifle in the bottom of the launch; then, just as he was
reaching for an oar, he saw back among the tall cabbage palms on the
island in an open space, a glowing, silvery object, like a house painted
silver and shining under the rays of a brilliant sun.

Then the whole thing came to him. He remembered the press descriptions
from Wyoming of the Mercutian vehicle. He saw this white rectangle on the
little Florida island as a miniature of that which had brought the
invaders of Wyoming from space. And then this girl--

Fear for an instant supplanted amazement in Alan Newland's heart. He
looked around. He could see back into the trees plainly, almost across the
island. He stood up in the boat. There seemed no one else in sight.

Alan sat down and, taking up the oar, sculled the launch toward the spot
where the girl was standing. His mind still refused to think clearly. The
vague thought came to him that he might be struck dead by some unknown
power the instant he landed. Then, as he again met the girl's eyes--a
clear, direct, honest gaze with something of a compelling dignity in
it--his fear suddenly left him.

A moment later the bow of the launch pushed its way through the wire grass
and touched the bank. Alan laid aside his oar, tied the boat to a
half-submerged log, and stepped ashore.



CHAPTER V.


CAPTURED!


When I recovered consciousness I found myself lying in the sand with
Mercer sitting beside me. It was still night. The tangled wreckage of our
airplane lay near by; evidently Mercer had carried me out of it.

I sat up.

"I'm all right," I said. "What happened?"

He grinned at me with relief.

"The damned engine stopped. I don't know what was the matter. You had the
light off. I couldn't see anything when we got down close."

He waved his hand toward the wrecked plane.

"It's done for," he added; "but I'm not hurt much. Are you?"

"No," I said. "I'm all right."

I climbed to my feet unsteadily; my head seemed about to split open.

"Garland's burning," he added.

Over the desert, some two or three miles away, the burning town could be
seen plainly.

"What are we going to do?" Mercer asked after a moment.

I was pretty weak and badly bruised all over. Mercer seemed to have fared
better than I. We talked over our situation at length. Finally we decided
to rest where we were until daybreak. I would feel better then, and we
could start back on foot for Mantua and Frannie.

I lay down again--my head was going round like a top--and Mercer sat
beside me. It was pretty cold, but we were warmly dressed and not
uncomfortable. The fact that we were so close to the Mercutians--not much
over seven or eight miles--worried us a little. But we reasoned that we
were in no great danger. We could still see their light-ray standing
vertically in the air.

Occasionally it would swing slowly to one side or the other. Once it swung
toward us, but as its base was in a hollow, it was cut off by the higher
ground between as it swung down, and we knew it could not reach us from
that position.

After a while I fell asleep. When Mercer woke me up it was dawn.

"Let's get started," he said. "I'm hungry as the devil."

I felt much better now. I was hungry myself, and stiff, and chilled.

"You'll feel better walking," he added. "Come on. It'll take us a deuce of
a while over this sand."

We decided to strike for the railroad at its closest point to us. The
State automobile road to Cody ran along near the railroad, and we planned
to follow that up to Mantua.

After a last look at our plane, which was hopelessly demolished, we
started off, heading north of Garland. We had been walking along a few
minutes when Mercer suddenly gripped me by the arm. I followed the
direction of his glance. Another rocket was rising from the Mercutian
base. It was still dark enough for us to see its flare as it rose and
curved in a long, graceful arc. We stopped stock still and stood watching.
The rocket arched over to the north. As it came down we lost sight of it.

"That went into Mantua," said Mercer in a horrified whisper.

A moment later we saw, in the direction of Mantua, that brief, silent,
smokeless red and green flash. Then the sky lighted up a lurid red, and we
knew Mantua was burning.

We stood looking at each other for a time, too frightened and horrified
for words. The thing was not like modern warfare. It was uncanny in its
silent deadliness, and there seemed a surety about it that was appalling.

"We're cut off," said Mercer finally.

His face was white and his voice trembled.

We were both pretty much unnerved, but after a moment we got ourselves
together and talked calmly about what was best for us to do.

We concluded finally to go ahead to the road. We calculated we were not
over two miles from the nearest part of it. We would strike it about
halfway between Garland and Mantua, and we thought it just possible we
would find passing along it some refugees from the two towns. I couldn't
quite see how meeting them could help us any, unless we encountered some
vehicle that would give us a lift. However, the walking would be easier,
and when we got to the road we could decide which way to go--north to
Frannie, or south around Garland to Powell.

The sun was just rising when we started again. It took us nearly an hour
to reach the road. As far as we could see it was deserted. We stopped here
and held another consultation.

"It's easily twelve miles up to Frannie," I said, "and I don't believe
more than eight to Powell. Let's go that way. We can get down to Cody from
there. I guess there are still people left in Powell."

We started down the road toward Garland. It seemed the sensible thing to
do. We were both famished by now and thirsty also. I had an idea that,
since the fires in Garland were about burned out, there might be an
isolated house unharmed, where we could find food and water.

I sometimes wonder now at our temerity in venturing so calmly to face this
unknown danger. We were in the enemy's country--an enemy whose methods of
attacking us might at any moment prove a hundred times more efficacious
than they had so far. But we did not consider that then.

There was, indeed, nothing else we could have done advantageously. This
road we were on was the only one within twenty or thirty miles. To have
struck west from our wrecked plane--away from the Mercutians--would have
brought us to face a hundred miles or more of desert over to the
Yellowstone.

It was now broad daylight--and almost cloudless, as is usual in this
locality. Half an hour of walking brought us nearly to the outskirts of
Garland. There was less smoke all the time. We judged the fire must be
pretty well burned out by now. Behind us the smoke of Mantua, a much
larger town than Garland, rose in a great rolling cloud.

We were walking along, wondering what we should find ahead, when suddenly
behind Garland and off to the right we saw another huge cloud of smoke
rising.

"Powell!" ejaculated Mercer, coming to a dead stop in the road. "Good God,
they've got Powell, too!"

There was no doubt about it--the town of Powell was also in flames. We sat
down together then at the side of the road. We didn't quite know what else
to do. We were both faint. Our situation seemed every moment to be getting
worse; we appeared further from even comparative safety now than when we
left our plane at dawn.

There seemed nothing else to do now but go ahead into Garland, a distance
of only half a mile. There we might find food and water; and, thus
refreshed, we could start back north to cover the fifteen miles to
Frannie.

Garland, a few days before, was a town of about five hundred inhabitants;
but I do not suppose that, at the time of its destruction, there were more
than a score or two of people remaining in it.

We started off again, and within twenty minutes were among the smoldering
houses of the town. It consisted practically of only one street--the road
we were on--with the houses strung along it. The houses had been, most of
them, small frame structures. They were nothing now but smoldering heaps
of ashes with the chimneys left standing, like gaunt, silent sentinels. As
we passed on down the road we saw several twisted forms that we took for
the remains of human beings. It is unnecessary for me to describe them. We
hurried on, shuddering.

Our objective was the lower end of the town, for there, perhaps a quarter
of a mile off to one side with a branch road leading to it, we saw a
single house and out-buildings left standing. We turned down this road and
approached the house. It was a rather good-looking building of the
bungalow type with a wide-spreading porch. Beside it stood a long, low,
rectangular building we took to be a garage. There was an automobile
standing in the doorway, and behind it we caught the white gleam of an
airplane wing.

"We're all right now," cried Mercer. "There's a car, and there's a plane
inside. One of them ought to run."

At this unexpected good fortune we were jubilant. We could get back to
Billings now in short order.

We climbed up the porch steps and entered the house. We did not call out,
for it seemed obvious that no one would be there after what had occurred
in Garland so near by.

"There must be something to eat here," I said. "Let's find out--and then
get back to Billings."

The big living room was empty, but there was no sign of disorder. A closed
door stood near at hand.

"That might be the way to the kitchen," I suggested. "Come on."

I pushed open the door and entered, with Mercer close behind me. It was a
bedroom. The bed stood over by a window. I stopped in horror, for on the
bed, hunched forward in a sitting position, was the body of a man!

With the first sudden shock of surprise over, we stopped to note details.
The man's hand, lying on the blanket, clutched a revolver. A mirror
directly across from him was shattered as though by a bullet. A small
bedroom chair was overturned near the center of the room.

"He--he isn't burned." Mercer spoke the words hardly above a whisper.
"Something else killed him--there's been a fight. They--"

He stopped.

A sudden panic seized me. I wanted to run--to do something--anything--that
would get me away from the nameless, silent terror that seemed all about.

"Come on," I whispered back. "God! Let's get out of here."

As we got out into the living room we heard slow, dragging footsteps on
the porch outside. We stopped again, shrinking back against the wall.

"They--they--it's--" Mercer's whispered words died away. We were both
terrified beyond the power of reasoning. The dragging footsteps came
closer--a sound that had in it nothing of human tread. Then we heard soft
voices--words that were unintelligible.

"It's the Mercutians," I found voice to whisper. "They--"

A figure appeared in the porch doorway, outlined against the light
behind--the figure of a short, squat man. He seemed to have on some sort
of white, furry garment. He was bareheaded, with hair falling to his
shoulders.

At the sight of him my terror suddenly left me. Here was an enemy I could
cope with. The dread fear of supernatural beings that had possessed me
evaporated.

With a shout to Mercer I dashed forward directly at the doorway. I think
the Mercutian had not yet seen us; he stood quite still, his body blocking
the full width of the doorway.

I let fly with my fist as I came up and hit him full in the face. At the
same instant my body struck his. He toppled backward and I went through
the doorway. I tripped over him on the porch outside and fell sprawling.
Before I could rise three other Mercutians fell upon me and pinned me
down.

Mercer was right behind me in the doorway. I saw him pause an instant to
see what was happening. There seemed to be five Mercutians altogether. The
one I had hit lay quite still. Three others were holding me.

The fifth stood to one side, watching Mercer, but apparently inactive.

I saw Mercer hesitate. An expression of surprise came over his face. His
body swayed; he took a single step forward, half turned, and then fell in
a crumpled heap.



CHAPTER VI.


MIELA.


The girl stood quiet beside the tree, watching Alan as he tied up his
boat. She continued smiling. Alan stood up and faced her. He wondered what
he should say--whether she could understand him any better than he could
her.

"You speak English?" he began hesitantly.

The girl did not answer at once; she seemed to be trying to divine his
meaning. Then she waved her hand--a curious movement, which he took to be
a gesture of negation--her broadening smile disclosing teeth that were
small, even, and very white.

At this closer view Alan could see she was apparently about twenty years
old, as time is reckoned on earth. Her body was very slender, gracefully
rounded, yet with an appearance of extreme fragility. Her slenderness, and
the long, sleek wings behind, made her appear taller than she really was;
actually she was about the height of a normal woman of our own race.

Her legs were covered by a pair of trousers of some silky fabric, grayish
blue in color. Her bare feet were incased in sandals, the golden cords of
which crossed her insteps and wound about her ankles, fastening down the
lower hems of the trousers. A silken, gray-blue scarf was wound about her
waist; crossing in front, it passed up over her breast and shoulders,
crossing again between the wings behind and descending to the waist.

Her hair was a smooth, glossy black. It was parted in the middle, covered
her ears, and came forward over each shoulder. The plaits were bound
tightly around with silken cords; each was fastened to her body in two
places, at the waist and, where the plait ended, the outside of the
trouser leg just above the knee.

Her skin was cream colored, smooth in texture, and with a delicate flush
of red beneath the surface. Her eyes were black, her face small and oval,
with a delicately pointed chin. There was nothing remarkable about her
features except that they were extraordinarily beautiful. But--and this
point Alan noticed at once--there was in her expression, in the delicacy
of her face, a spiritual look that he had never seen in a woman before. It
made him trust her; and--even then, I think--love her, too.

Such was the strange girl as Alan saw her that morning standing beside the
tree on the bank of the little Florida bayou.

"I can't talk your language," said Alan. He realized it was a silly thing
to say. But his smile answered hers, and he went forward until he was
standing close beside her. She did not appear so tall now, for he towered
over her, the strength and bigness of his frame making hers seem all the
frailer by contrast.

He held out his hand. The girl looked at it, puzzled.

"Won't you shake hands?" he said; and then he realized that, too, was a
silly remark.

She wrinkled up her forehead in thought; then, with a sudden
comprehension, she laughed--a soft little ripple of laughter--and placed
her hand awkwardly in his.

As he released her hand she reached hers forward and brushed it lightly
against his cheek. Alan understood that was her form of greeting. Then she
spread her wings and curtsied low--making as charming a picture, he
thought, as he had ever seen in his life.

As she straightened up her eyes laughed into his, and again she spoke a
few soft words--wholly unintelligible. Then she pointed toward the sun,
which was still low over the horizon, and then to the silver object lying
back near the center of the island.

"I know," said Alan. "Mercury."

The girl repeated his last word immediately, enunciating it almost
perfectly. Then she laid her hand upon her breast, saying: "Miela."

"Alan," he answered, indicating himself.

The girl laughed delightedly, repeating the word several times. Then she
took him by the hand and made him understand that she wished to lead him
back into the island.

They started off, and then Alan noticed a curious thing. She walked as
though weighted to the ground by some invisible load. She did not raise
her feet normally, but dragged them, like a diver who walks on land in his
heavily weighted iron shoes. After a few steps she spread her wings, and,
flapping them slowly, was able to get along better, although it was
obvious that she could not lift her body off the ground to fly.

For a moment Alan was puzzled, then he understood. The force of gravity on
earth was too great for the power of her muscles, which were developed
only to meet the pull of Mercury--a very much smaller planet.

The girl was so exceedingly frail Alan judged she did not weigh, here on
earth, much over a hundred pounds. But even that he could see was too much
for her. She could not fly, and it was only by the aid of her wings that
she was able to walk with anything like his own freedom of movement.

He made her understand, somehow, that he comprehended her plight. Then,
after a time, he put his left arm about her waist. She spread the great
red wings out behind him, the right one passing over his shoulder; and in
this fashion they went forward more easily.

The girl kept constantly talking and gesturing. She seemed remarkably
intelligent; and even then, at the very beginning of their
acquaintanceship, she made Alan understand that she intended to learn his
language. Indeed, she seemed concerned about little else; and she went
about her task systematically and with an ability that amazed him.

As they walked forward she kept continually stooping to touch objects on
the ground--a stick, a handful of sand, a woodland flower, or a palmetto
leaf. Or, again, she would indicate articles of his clothing, or his
features. In each case Alan gave her the English word; and in each case
she repeated it after him.

Once she stopped stock still, and with astonishing rapidity and accuracy
rattled off the whole list--some fifteen or twenty words
altogether--pointing out each object as she enunciated the word.

Alan understood then--and he found out afterward it was the case--that the
girl's memory was extraordinarily retentive, far more retentive than is
the case with any normal earth person. He discovered also, a little later,
that her intuitive sense was highly developed. She seemed, in many
instances, to divine his meaning, quite apart from his words or the
gestures--which often were unintelligible to her--with which he
accompanied them.

After a time they reached the Mercutian vehicle. It was a cubical box,
with a pyramid-shaped top, some thirty feet square at the base, and
evidently constructed of metal, a gleaming white nearer like silver than
anything else Alan could think of. He saw that it had a door on the side
facing him, and several little slitlike windows, covered by a thick,
transparent substance which might have been glass.

As they got up close to it Alan expected the girl's companions to come
out. His heart beat faster. Suddenly he raised his voice and shouted:
"Hello, inside!"

The girl looked startled. Then she smiled and made the negative gesture
with her hand.

Alan understood then that she was alone. They went inside the vehicle. It
was dark in there. Alan could make out little, but after a moment his eyes
grew accustomed to the darkness.

He noticed first that the thing was very solidly constructed. He expected
to see some complicated mechanism, but there was little or nothing of the
kind so far as he could make out in the darkness in this first hurried
inspection.

Fastened to one wall was an apparatus which he judged was for the making
of oxygen. He looked around for batteries, and for electric lights, but
could see nothing of the kind.

All this time Alan's mind had been busily trying to puzzle out the mystery
of the girl's presence here alone. Evidently she came in the most friendly
spirit; and thus, quite evidently, her mission, whatever it was, must be
very different from that of the invaders who had landed almost
simultaneously in Wyoming.

Whatever it was that had brought her--whatever her purpose--he realized it
must be important. The girl, even now, seemed making no effort to show or
explain anything to him, but continued plying him with questions that gave
her the English words of everything about them that she could readily
indicate.

Alan knew then that she must have something important to
communicate--something that she wanted to say as quickly as possible. And
he knew that she realized the only way was for her to learn his language,
which she was doing with the least possible loss of time, and with an
utter disregard of everything else that might have obtruded.

Alan decided then to take the girl back home with him--indeed, it had
never been in his mind to do anything else--and let Beth care for her.
Meanwhile he would do everything he could to help her get the knowledge
necessary to make known what it was that had brought her from Mercury.
That she had some direct connection with the Wyoming invaders he did not
doubt.

Alan had just reached this decision when the girl made him realize that
she had the same thought in mind. She pointed around the room and then to
herself, and he knew that she was insisting upon a general word to include
all her surroundings.

Finally Alan answered: "House."

After pointing to him, she waved her hand vaguely toward the country
outside the open doorway, and he understood she was asking where his house
was.

Alan's decision was given promptly. "We'll go there," he said.

He put his arm about her and started out. By the way she immediately
responded he knew she understood, and that it was what she wished to do.

They got back to Alan's launch in a few moments. He seated her in the
stern of the boat, where she half reclined with her wings spread out a
little behind her. So assiduous was she--and so facile--in her task of
learning English, that before she would let him start the motor she had
learned the names of many of the new objects in sight, and several verbs
connected with his actions of the moment.

There was a large tarpaulin in the launch, and this Alan wrapped about the
girl's shoulders. He did not want her vivid red wings to be seen by any
one as they passed down the bayou.

Finally they started off.

Professor Newland's home was some three miles from the village of Bay
Head, on the shore of a large bay which opened into the Gulf of Mexico.
The bayou down which they were heading flowed into this bay near where the
house stood. Their home was quite isolated, Alan thought with
satisfaction. There was no other habitation nearer than Bay Head except a
few negro shacks. With the girl's wings covered he could take her home and
keep her there, in absolute seclusion, without causing any comment that
might complicate things.

On the way down the bayou the girl showed extreme interest in everything
about her. She seemed to have no fear, trusting Alan implicitly in his
guidance and protection of her in this strange world. She continued her
questions; she laughed frequently, with almost a childlike freedom from
care. Only once or twice, he noticed, as some thought occurred to her, the
laughter died away, her face suddenly sobered, and a far-away, misty look
came into her beautiful eyes.

Alan sat close beside her in the stern, steering the launch and
occasionally pulling the tarpaulin back onto her shoulders when it
threatened to slip off because of her impetuous gestures.

They saw only a few negroes as they passed down the bayou, and these paid
no particular attention to them. Within an hour Alan had the girl safely
inside the bungalow, and was introducing her, with excited explanations,
to his astonished father and sister, who were just at that moment sitting
down to breakfast.



CHAPTER VII.


THE MERCUTIAN CAMP.


As I saw Mercer fall to the floor of the porch a sudden rage swept over
me. I struggled violently with the three men pinning me down. They
appeared very much weaker than I, but even though I could break their
holds the three of them were more than a match for me.

The man who was standing inactive, and who I realized had struck down
Mercer in some unknown, deadly way, appeared to be the leader. Once, as
one of my assailants made some move, the import of which the leader
evidently understood, but which I did not, I heard him give a sharp
command. It occurred to me then that if I offered too much resistance--if
it seemed I was likely to get away from them--I might possibly be struck
as swiftly as Mercer had been. So I gave up abruptly and lay still.

They must have understood my motive--or perhaps they felt that I was not
worth the trouble of taking alive--for immediately I stopped struggling
they unhanded me and rose to their feet.

I stood up also, deciding to appear quite docile, for the time being at
any rate, until I could comprehend better with what I had to contend.

The man who appeared to be their leader issued another command. One of
the men with whom I had been struggling immediately stepped a few feet
away, out of my reach. I knew he had been told to guard me. He kept just
that distance away thereafter, following my movements closely and seeming
never to take his eyes off me for a moment.

I had opportunity now to inspect these strange enemies more closely. The
leader was the tallest. He was about five and a half feet in height, I
judged, and fairly stocky. The others were all considerably shorter--not
much over five feet, perhaps. All were broad-framed, although not stout
to any degree approaching fatness.

From their appearance, they might all have been fairly powerful men, the
leader especially. But even the short struggle I had had with them showed
me they were not. Their bodies, too, had seemed under my grip to have a
flimsy quality, a lack of firmness, of solidity, entirely belied by their
appearance.

They were all dressed in a single rude garment of short white fur, made
all in one piece, trousers and shirt, and leaving only their arms bare.
Their feet were incased in buskins that seemed to be made of leather.
Their hair was a reddish-brown color, and fell scraggling a little below
the shoulder line.

Their skin was a curious, dead white--like the pallor of a man long in
prison. Their faces, which had no sign of hair on them, were broad, with
broad flat noses, and with abnormally large eyes that seemed to blink
stolidly with an owl-like stare.

Their leader was of somewhat different type. He was, as I have said,
nearly six inches taller than the others, and leaner and more powerful
looking. His hair was black, and his skin was not so dead white. His eyes
were not so abnormally large as those of his companions. His nose was
straight, with a high bridge. His face was hairless. It was a strong
face, with an expression of dignity about it, a consciousness of power,
and a certain sense of cruelty expressed in the firmness of his lips and
the set of his chin.

None of them was armed--or, at least, their weapons were not visible to
me.

I was much concerned about Mercer. He and the man I had hit were both
lying motionless where they had fallen. I stooped over Mercer. No one
offered to stop me, although when I moved I saw my guard make a swift
movement with his hand to his belt. My heart leaped to my throat, but
nothing happened to me, and I made a hasty examination of Mercer.

Quite evidently he was dead.

Meanwhile the Mercutians were examining their fallen comrade. He also was
dead, I judged from their actions. They left him where he was lying, and
their leader impatiently signed me toward the steps that led down from
the porch to the roadway. We started off, my guard keeping close behind
me. I noticed then how curiously hampered the Mercutians seemed to be in
their movements.

I have explained how Alan observed the effect of our earth's gravity on
Miela. It was even more marked with the Mercutians here, for she had the
assistance of wings, while they did not. The realization of this
encouraged me tremendously. I knew now that physically these enemies were
no match for me; that I could break away from them whenever I wished.

But the way in which Mercer had been killed--that I could not understand.
It was that I had to guard against. I was afraid to do anything that
would expose me to this unknown attack.

I tried to guess over how great a distance this weapon, whatever it was,
would prove effective. I assumed only a limited number of feet, although
my only reason for thinking so was my guard's evident determination to
keep close to me.

All this flashed through my mind while we were descending the steps to
the roadway. When we reached the ground we turned back toward the garage,
and with slow, plodding steps the leader of the Mercutians preceded me to
its entrance, his companions following close behind me. They had
evidently been here before, I could tell from their actions. I realized
that probably they had all been inside the garage when Mercer and I first
approached the house.

It was quite apparent now that the Mercutians did not understand the use
of either automobiles or airplanes; they poked around these as though
they were some strange, silent animals. Inside the garage I was ordered
to stand quiet, with my guard near by, while the rest of them continued
what appeared to be a search about the building.

We passed by the house, and I realized that we were starting for the
Mercutian base some four miles away. I remembered then that I was
extremely hungry and thirsty. I stopped suddenly and endeavored to
explain my wants, indicating the house as a place where I could get food.

The leader smiled. His name was Tao, I had learned from hearing his men
address him. I do not know why that smile reassured me, but it did. It
seemed somehow to make these enemies less inhuman--less supernatural--in
my mind. Indeed, I was fast losing my first fear of them, although I
still had a great respect for the way in which they had killed Mercer.

Tao told his men to wait, and motioned me toward the house. The bodies of
Mercer and the man I had struck down were still lying where they had
fallen on the porch. We found food and water in the kitchen, and I sat
down and made a meal, while Tao stood watching me. When I had finished I
put several slices of bread and meat in my coat. He signified that it was
unnecessary, but I insisted, and he smiled again and let me have my way.

Again we started off. This walk of four miles of desert that lay between
Garland and the point on the Shoshone River where the invaders were
established was about all I could manage, for I was almost exhausted. I
realized then how great an exertion the Mercutians were put to, for they
seemed nearly as tired as I. We stopped frequently to rest, and it was
well after noon when we approached the hollow through which the Shoshone
River ran.

Several times I noticed where the Mercutian Light had burned off the
scrubby desert vegetation. As we got closer I could see it now in the
sunlight, standing vertically up in the air, motionless. There were signs
all about now where the light had burned. We were passing along a little
gully--the country here was somewhat rough and broken up--when something
came abruptly from behind a rock. Its extraordinary appearance startled
me so I stared at it in amazement and fear. It came closer, and I saw it
was one of the Mercutians.

He was completely incased in a suit of dull black cloth, or rubber, or
something of the kind. On his head was a helmet of the same material,
with a mask over his face having two huge circular openings covered with
a flexible, transparent substance. On his back was a sort of tank with a
pipe leading to his mouth. He looked, indeed, something like a man in a
diving suit, and still more like the pictures I had seen of soldiers in
the World War with gas masks on. He pulled off his helmet as he came up
to us, and I saw he was similar in appearance to the red-haired
Mercutians who had captured me.

After a short conversation with Tao he went back to his station by the
rock, and we proceeded onward down the gully to the river bank. I saw a
number of Mercutians dressed this way during the afternoon. They seemed
to be guarding the approaches to the camp, and I decided later this
costume was for protection against the effects of the light-ray.

The Shoshone River was at this point about two hundred feet wide, and at
this season of the year a swift-moving, icy stream some two or three feet
deep. There were small trees at intervals along its banks. All about me
now I could see where they had been burned by the action of the light.

The vehicle in which the invaders had arrived lay on the near side of the
river, some five hundred feet below where we came out of the gully. It
was similar in appearance to the one Alan had found in Florida, only many
times larger. It lay there now, with its pyramid-shaped top pointing up
into the air, close beside the river, and gleaming a dazzling white under
the rays of the afternoon sun.

There were perhaps a hundred Mercutians in sight altogether. Most of them
were down by the vehicle; all of them were on this side of the river. In
fact, as I soon realized, it would have been difficult, if not
impossible, for them to have crossed. The desert on the opposite side of
the Shoshone was level and unbroken. It was swept clear of everything,
apparently, by the light-ray.

We turned down the river bank, and soon were close to the shining vehicle
that had brought these strange invaders from space. What would I see in
this camp of the first beings to reach earth from another planet? What
fate awaited me there? These questions hammered at my brain as we
approached the point where so much death and destruction had been dealt
out to the surrounding country.



CHAPTER VIII.


THE ESCAPE.


The Mercutians all regarded me curiously as we came among them. By the
respect they accorded Tao, and his attitude toward them, I decided he was
the leader of the entire party. I stopped, wondering what would happen
next. The man guarding me was still close at hand. Tao spoke a few words
to him and then moved away. My guard immediately sat down. I saw nothing
was required of me at the moment, and sat down also.

I had opportunity now to examine the strange things and people about me
more in detail. The Mercutians all seemed to be of the same short, squat,
red-haired type. Tao was, indeed, the only one I saw who had black hair;
and he was the tallest, and by far the most commanding looking figure of
them all.

They wore several different costumes, although the garment of white fur
was the most common. A few were dressed in the black costume of the guard
in the gully. Still others were garbed only in short, wide trousers and
shirts of a soft leather, with legs bare from the knee down, and with
leather buskins on their feet.

The light-ray was set up near the river, on a metallic structure
supporting a small platform some thirty feet above the ground. A ladder
up one side gave access to this platform from below. The light itself
came from a cubical metallic box, perhaps six feet square, suspended
above the platform in a balancing mechanism that allowed it to swing in
all directions.

All the metal of this apparatus, the projector, the platform and its
framework, was apparently of the same kind; it had the appearance of
burnished copper. The whole seemed fairly complicated, but not unlike a
huge searchlight would appear if mounted that way.

Coming out of the projector and running down to the ground were black
wires, which led to a metallic box a few feet away. This box was
rectangular in shape; six feet long, perhaps, two feet broad, and the
same in depth. I judged it to be the dynamo or battery from which the
projector was supplied with the light-ray.

A short distance back from the river I saw what appeared to be a small
mortar, which I assumed was for the sending of the light-rockets, or
bombs. Several other light-ray projectors, sections of their supporting
structures, and the unassembled parts of other apparatus, were lying
scattered about the ground. A considerable number of the Mercutians were
laboriously bringing out of the vehicle still more apparatus.

It was obvious to me then that they were only just getting started in
their offensive and defensive preparations. This I could easily
understand when I had watched for a moment the activities going on. All
of the apparatus which they were engaged in bringing out and assembling
was of metal, and it was so extremely heavy here on earth that they could
hardly handle it.

Standing on the platform beside the light-ray projector were two men
evidently in charge of it at the moment. They were dressed in black, with
black gloves, although without helmets. I noticed that they had little
pads over their ears, with wires running from them down to a small box at
the waist.

Once I saw one of them look up sharply, as though he had heard something;
and, following the wave of his hand, I saw the tiny black-garbed figure
of a man on the higher ground behind the gully through which we had come.
I reasoned then that this was a lookout stationed there, and that he was
directing the action of the light by some form of wireless telephony.

For perhaps an hour I sat there, with my guard near by watching me. I was
sorry, now that I found myself in the midst of these enemies, that I had
not made a determined effort to escape earlier in the day, when there
would have been only four of them to cope with.

I realized that I didn't know any more now about the power this guard had
over me than I had at the beginning. He certainly looked inoffensive,
sitting there, but the very calmness with which he watched me made me
feel I would be taking a desperate chance in attempting to escape. I
decided then to wait until nightfall and to watch a favorable opportunity
to break away.

Under cover of darkness, if once I could get out of their sight, I was
satisfied they would never catch me. It was my plan to strike back to
Garland. I had noticed carefully the lay of the land coming over, and
believed I could find my way back. Then, with the car or the plane that
was there in the garage, I could get back to Billings.

These thoughts were running through my mind when Tao abruptly presented
himself before me and ordered me to get up. I did so, smiling in as
friendly a fashion as I could manage. He then made me assist in the work
of carrying the heavy pieces of apparatus. Apparently he was determined
that I, as an earth man, should work hard, since the Mercutians were so
heavily handicapped by the gravity of my planet. I concluded that it
would be my best policy to help them all I could--that by so doing they
might relax a little in their watchfulness, and thus enable me to get
away that night.

I signified to Tao my understanding of what he was after, and made them
all see my entire readiness and ability to help. For the rest of the
afternoon I was dragging about from place to place, carrying the
projectors to the various positions where they had decided to put them
up. It seemed to be their plan to establish some twenty or thirty
projectors around the vehicle; they were setting them all at points about
a hundred yards away from it. These projectors differed in size and
shape. Some were cubical, others pyramid-shaped, open at the base as
though to send out the light in a spreading ray.

I saw now, when I had a chance to inspect the projectors closer, that
they were black outside and like burnished copper inside, to reflect the
light. I judged that this black covering must have been like the black
suits worn by some of the men, and that it was impervious to the
light-ray. Near the center of each projector was a coil of wire. The
wires from outside ran to it, and across the open face of the projector
a large number of fine lateral wires ran parallel, very close together.

These were about all the details I noticed. I wanted to remember them,
although they conveyed very little to me, because I realized all this I
was seeing might prove of immense help to the authorities when I got back
to Billings.

Night came, and I was still at work. Tao seemed tremendously pleased at
what I was doing, and I noticed with satisfaction that his attitude
toward me seemed gradually changing. My guard still followed me about,
but he did not watch me quite so closely now, I thought.

My help, that afternoon, was considerable. I was by far the strongest man
in the camp; and, more than that, I was able to move about so much faster
than they that I could do things in a few moments that would have taken
them many times as long.

Tao personally directed most of my efforts. He told me where to take the
things, and I took them, smilingly, and always coming back to him for new
orders. I moved so fast, indeed, that my guard had difficulty in keeping
close to me. Several times I experimented and found that I could get away
from him quite a little distance without a protest, either from him or
from Tao.

As it began to grow dark, they lighted up the camp. This was accomplished
by little metallic posts that had been set around at intervals. Each had
a tiny coil of wire suspended at its top, which became incandescent and
threw out a reddish-green light. Around each light was a square black
wire cage some three feet in diameter. I conjectured that these lights
used the same ray as the projectors, only in a different form, and that
the cage was to protect any one from going too close. The light from
these illuminators was much the same in aspect as the ray, except that it
seemed to diffuse itself readily and carried only a comparatively short
distance.

The scene now, under this red-green glare, was weird in the extreme. The
work all about me went on steadily. The Mercutians were all dressed in
white furry garments now--I concluded because of the cold--with the
exception of those who had on the suits and helmets of black.

The reddish-green light made them all appear like little gnomes at work.
Indeed, the whole scene, with its points of color in the darkness, and the
huge monstrous shadows all about, was more like some fantastic picture out
of a fairy book than a scene on this earth.

Soon after nightfall Tao stopped me, and one of his men brought me
something to eat. I still had the slices of bread and meat in my pocket,
but, thinking I might need them later on, I kept them there. Tao and I sat
down near one of the lights and ate together. We were served by one of the
men. My guard still kept close at hand.

The food was nothing more than hard pieces of baked dough and a form of
sweet something like chocolate. For drink there was a hot liquid quite
comparable to tea. This was served us in small metal cups with handles
that seemed to be insulated from the heat.

This meal was brought to us from inside the vehicle. While we were eating
I could see many of the Mercutians going inside and coming out with pieces
of this food in their hands, eating as they worked. Quite obviously the
business of assembling their apparatus was uppermost in the minds of all
of them.

The whole atmosphere about the place, I realized now, in spite of the
opposite effect their dragging footsteps gave, was one of feverish
activity. When we had eaten Tao seemed willing to sit quiet for a while.
My efforts to talk to him amused us both greatly, and I noticed with
satisfaction that he seemed to trust me more and more.

Finally my guard spoke, asking permission, I judged, to leave us and go
have his dinner. My heart leaped into my throat as I saw him go, leaving
me alone with Tao. I concluded that now, if ever, was my opportunity. Tao
trusted me--seemed to like me, in fact. No one else in the camp was paying
the least attention to us. If only I could, on some pretext, get myself a
reasonable distance away from him I would make a run for it.

I was turning this problem over in my mind when it was unexpectedly solved
for me. A low throbbing, growing momentarily louder, sounded from the
air--the hum of an airplane motor. I think Tao noticed it first--I saw him
cock his head to one side, listening.

After a moment, as the sound increased, he climbed to his feet and shouted
an order to the man nearest us.

The night had clouded over; it was unusually dark. I knew that a plane
without lights was approaching. Work about the camp stopped; every one
stood listening. I looked up at the light-ray platform. The two men there
were swinging the light back and forth, sweeping the sky.

Suddenly the sound ceased; the plane's motor had been shut off. Almost at
the same instant the light-ray picked up the plane. It was several
thousand feet in the air and almost over our heads, coming down in a
spiral. A moment more and the light-ray swung away.

The plane burst into flame, and I knew it was falling. An explosion
sounded near at hand. The camp was in chaos immediately. I faced about to
look at Tao; he had disappeared.

I waited no longer. Turning back from the river, I ran at full speed.



CHAPTER IX.


FUTILE ATTACKS.


There seemed to be no pursuit. In a few moments I was clear of the camp
and hidden in the darkness of the desert. I ran perhaps half a mile, then
I slowed down to a walk, completely winded. Turning, I could see behind me
the lights of the camp. I doubted if even now they had missed me. The bomb
dropped by the airplane and the plane itself falling almost, in their
midst must have plunged them for the time into confusion.

I kept on walking rapidly. The desert here was almost pathless;
occasionally I would cross a wandering wagon track, but none of them
seemed going in my direction. After a time I was not sure what my
direction was; all about me was a luminous darkness--and silence.

I found myself now almost exhausted from my exertions of the day. I
decided to go possibly a mile farther--to be well away from the
Mercutians--and then to lie down and sleep until daylight.

In about fifteen minutes more I concluded I had gone far enough, and,
lying down on the sand, was soon fast asleep. When I awoke it was
daylight, with the sun just rising.

With returning consciousness I looked about me in sudden fear, but there
was no one in sight. I ate the bread and meat I had in my pocket, and,
feeling much refreshed, but thirsty, I started again for Garland.

I made the town soon after noon that day. The little automobile was still
standing in the garage, and I started it without trouble. Before I left I
went up to the porch of the house.

The bodies of Mercer and the Mercutian were still lying there. I dragged
Mercer's body down the steps and put it into the back seat of the car
Then I started off. I stuck to the main road, and went through Mantua at
top speed, apprehensive that some of the Mercutians might be there. This
town, like Garland, was completely burned. Only the chimneys were left
standing amid piles of ashes.

At Frannie I took on two passengers. There was much curiosity on the part
of those I met along here, but I was unwilling to explain, deciding it
best to wait and tell my whole story to the military authorities at
Billings.

It was early afternoon when I got back to Billings. This was March 12. I
turned Mercer's body over to the police, who promptly took me in charge. I
gave them a brief outline of what had occurred. General Price, whose
command of the United States military operations against the Mercutians
was announced to the country two days later, had arrived that morning in
Billings by airplane. I demanded to see him, and when my business was
explained to him he granted me an immediate interview.

General Price was a man about fifty, a kindly gentleman of the old
Southern type, yet of thoroughly military demeanor. I told him everything
that had happened to me in detail as complete as I possibly could.
Mercer's body was examined that same afternoon. It was found to have been
drilled completely through the chest by a hole about the diameter of a
lead pencil. This hole did not seem to have been made by the passage of
any foreign object, but had more the aspect of a burn. I understood
then--Mercer had been killed by a tiny light-ray projector, with a short,
effective radius, aimed probably like a revolver.

What I was able to tell General Price about the Mercutians naturally was
invaluable to him. He asked me then to remain close to him during the
forthcoming operations. We arranged that I was on honor to give nothing
out to my paper without his approval.

The situation, as it appeared during the next few days, was not one of
grave danger. We were able to gage now with fair probability of
correctness the offensive strength of our enemies. They had no means of
transportation--could only move from their present position slowly and
with extreme difficulty. The possibility of the vehicle itself moving
occurred to us; but, as I pointed out, the task of replacing their heavy
apparatus in it, and then reassembling the apparatus in a new position,
made such a step impractical.

The only weapon the Mercutians had displayed so far was the light-ray in
its several forms. This seemed effective for ten miles at most. That the
Mercutians could be attacked by our artillery and destroyed seemed
certain.

By the 20th General Price had mobilized some ten thousand men. They
encamped on the prairie near Billings. The artillery was moved down to a
point near the Wyoming State line, about fifteen miles directly north of
the Mercutian camp.

Six days before this, forty-eight hours after I had returned to Billings,
observation planes had reported the establishment of two more light-rays,
similar in appearance to the first. During the succeeding days others
rapidly appeared. By the 20th there were probably thirty of them
altogether.

The reports stated that all were set up within a space seemingly of a few
hundred yards. They were of different diameters; some projected in
parallel rays, others spread out fan-shaped. These latter appeared not to
carry so far. The first one that had appeared, it was judged, had the
longest effective radius of them all.

During these days and nights preceding the 20th the light-rockets had been
fired with increasing frequency, but none was observed to carry over six
or eight miles. By this time the burned area for a circle of ten miles all
around the Mercutian camp was entirely depopulated, and no additional
destruction was reported.

On the night of the 20th, firing by directions from captive balloons, the
United States artillery began its bombardment from the Montana-Wyoming
line. After sending over some twenty shells, the firing ceased. It was
learned then that they had proven utterly ineffective. The diverging rays
of the Mercutian light had thrown a barrage around their position. The
shells striking the light had all exploded harmlessly in the air.

Subsequent bombardments made that night met with no better success. The
fact became obvious then that to artillery fire the Mercutians were
impregnable. For several days no further military operations were
attempted, with the exception of an occasional shell futilely thrown
against the light-rays.

The newspapers during these days were full of discussions--scientific and
otherwise--as to how this strange enemy of mankind could be destroyed or
dislodged. This was like no other warfare in history. The newspaper
statements gave the inference that General Price was entirely at a loss
how to proceed.

As a matter of fact, the press was quite correct in that assumption; and,
since the Mercutians were making no offensive moves, General Price decided
to do nothing until he was better informed.

I was fortunate enough to be present the next day at a conference the
general had with several scientific men who had come to Billings to meet
him. It was the opinion of these men of science that no artillery fire
could penetrate the light-barrage the Mercutians had thrown about them. No
airplane attack was practical, and to attack them from the ground with
infantry would be absurd.

On the other hand, it seemed obvious that the Mercutians could make no
offensive move either. They had probably already done all the damage that
they could. If matters were allowed to remain as they now were--thus
avoiding the useless sacrifice of men--inevitably the time would come when
the food supply the Mercutians had brought with them would be exhausted.
Meanwhile, if the invaders decided to move in their vehicle to another
location, they could not do so suddenly without abandoning their
apparatus.

Any lessening in the number of light-rays in operation could be taken as
an indication that a move of this kind was in preparation, and the warning
would give General Price time to execute any attack that in the meantime
might be planned.

It was decided then to remain comparatively inactive and await
developments from the opposite side.

During the three months that followed this decision artillery bases were
located at intervals on a circumference of about fifteen miles around the
Mercutian center. These were all on desert country. Lines of communication
between them were established, and the air above was thoroughly patrolled
night and day.

The ten thousand men under General Price it was not thought necessary or
advisable to augment. They were deployed around this circumference in
front of the artillery, nearer the ten-mile limit. Machine-gun outposts,
manned by volunteers exclusively, were established in Garland, Mantua and
other points within the area controlled by the light. These were for the
purpose of preventing, or reporting, any possible movements on foot of the
Mercutians.

During this time the government was, naturally, subjected to much harsh
criticism for its waiting attitude. It was suggested that armored
tanks--relics of the World War--could be put into commission. These, under
cover of darkness, could be used to rush the Mercutian position. This
obviously was an absurd plan, since the light-ray would instantly raise
the temperature of the metal composing the car to such a height that the
men inside would be killed--not to mention the fact that all explosives
in the car would be instantly detonated.

Another suggestion was that a night raid be made upon the outposts of the
camp by a few men armed with machine guns fired from the shoulder, in an
effort to capture one of the Mercutians garbed in a suit impervious to the
light. With this suit even one man with a machine gun would probably be
able to clean out the Mercutian camp.

This plan evoked much favorable comment. This black material, once in our
possession, could be analyzed and possibly be duplicated in quantity by
us. It seemed the logical way of making progress.

But, unfortunately, conditions around the Mercutian camp at present were
not the same as that night when I escaped. At that time it would have been
feasible; now it was impossible, for all the invaders were within the
small circle of projectors, and the ground outside this circle was never
free from the diverging rays of the light. Also, as one newspaper article
replied, even with such a suit of armor a man with a machine gun could do
little, for the light would instantly render useless the gun itself.

So the controversy went on, and General Price waited, knowing that each
day must bring the enemy nearer starvation. Such was the condition of
affairs in the latter part of June.

Then, one morning, I received a telegram from Alan Newland in Florida. I
had been corresponding with him at intervals, but he had never given me a
hint of what had happened down there.

The telegram read:

    Important Mercutian development here.
    Keep absolutely secret. Join us here at once.
    Answer.

I wired him immediately. Three days later I was at Bay Head.



CHAPTER X.


MIELA'S STORY.


When I reached the little Florida town Alan was there to meet me. He would
have none of my eager questions, but took me at once by launch to their
bungalow. No one was on the porch when we landed, and we went immediately
into the living room. There I found Beth and Professor Newland talking to
this extraordinary girl from another world, of whose existence, up to that
moment, I had been in complete ignorance. She was dressed especially for
my coming, they told me afterward, exactly as she had been that morning
when Alan found her. They wanted to confound me, and they succeeded.

I stood staring in amazement while Beth quietly introduced me. And Miela
spread her wings, curtsied, and replied in a quaint, soft little voice: "I
am honored, sir." Then she laughed prettily and, extending her hand,
added: "How do you do, Bob--my friend?"

When I had partially recovered from my astonishment Miela put on the big
blue-cloth cape she wore constantly to cover her wings. Then Alan and Beth
plunged into an excited explanation of how he had found Miela, and how all
this time she had remained in seclusion with them there studying their
language.

"You never have seen such assiduous young people," Professor Newland put
in. "And certainly she has been a wonderful pupil."

He patted Miela's hand affectionately; but I noticed then that his eyes
were very sad, as though from some unvoiced trouble or apprehension.

They had decided, the professor said, to keep the girl's presence a secret
from the world until they had learned from her in detail what her mission
was. The vehicle in which she had come was still on the island up the
bayou. Alan had stationed there three young men of Bay Head whom he could
trust. They were living on the island, guarding it.

During these two months while Miela, with uncanny rapidity, was mastering
their language, the Newlands had of course learned from her all she had to
tell them. The situation in Wyoming did not necessitate haste on their
part, and so they had waited. And now, with a decision reached, they sent
for me.

That evening after supper we all went out on the bungalow porch, and Miela
told me her story. She spoke quietly, with her hands clasped nervously in
her lap. At times in her narrative her eyes shone with the eager, earnest
sincerity of her words; at others they grew big and troubled as she spoke
of the problems that were harassing her world and mine--the inevitable
self-struggles of humanity, whatever its environment, itself its own worst
enemy.

"I am daughter of Lua," Miela began slowly, "of the Great City in the
Country of Light. My mother, Lua, is a teacher of the people. My father,
Thaal, died when still I was a child. I--I came to your earth--"

She paused and, turning to Beth, added appealingly: "Oh, there is so
much--to begin--how can I tell--"

"Tell him about Tao," Beth said.

"Tao!" I exclaimed.

"He leads those who came to your earth in the north," Miela went on. "He
was my"--she looked to Alan for the word--"my suitor there in the Great
City. He wished me for his wife--for the mother of his children. But
that--that was not what I wished."

"You'd better tell him about conditions in your world first, Miela," said
Alan. He spoke very gently, tenderly.

I had already seen, during supper, how he felt toward her; I could readily
understand it, too, for, next to Beth, she seemed the most adorable woman
I had ever met. There was nothing unusually strange about her, when her
wings were covered, except her quaint accent and sometimes curious
gestures; and no one could be with her long without feeling the sweet
gentleness of her nature and loving her for it.

"Tell him about your women," Beth added.

I noticed the affectionate regard she also seemed to have for Miela; and I
noticed, too, that there was in her face that vague look of sorrow that
was in her father's.

The habitable world of Mercury, Miela then went on to tell me, was divided
into three zones--light, twilight and darkness. There was no direct
sunlight in the Light Country--only a diffused daylight like the light on
our earth when the sky is clouded over. The people of the Light Country,
Miela's people, were the most civilized and the ruling race.

In the twilight zone around them, grading back to the Dark Country,
various other peoples dwelt, and occasionally warred with their neighbors
for possession of land in the light.

In the center of the Light Country, directly underneath the sun--that is,
where the sun, would always appear near the zenith--was the Fire Country.
Here, owing to violent storms, the atmospheric envelope of the planet was
frequently disturbed sufficiently to allow passage for the sun's direct
rays. Then would ensue in that locality, for a limited time, a heat so
intense as to destroy life. This Fire Country was practically uninhabited.

"You see, Bob," Alan interrupted, "the dark part of Mercury--that is the
side that continually faces away from the sun--is also practically
uninhabited. Only strange animals and savages live there. And the twilight
zones, and the ring of Light Country, with the exception of its center,
are too densely populated. This has caused an immense amount of trouble.
The Twilight People are an inferior race. They have tried to mix with
those of the Light Country. It doesn't work. There's been trouble for
generations; trouble over the women, for one thing. Anyhow, the Twilight
People have been kept out as much as possible. Now this fellow Tao--"

"Let Miela explain about the women first," Beth interjected.

Then Miela went on to tell me that only the females of Mercury had
wings--given them by the Creator as a protection against the pursuit of
the male. At marriage, to insure submission to the will of her husband, a
woman's wings were clipped. For more than a generation now there had been
a growing rebellion on the part of the women against this practice. In
this movement Miela's mother, Lua, was a leader. To overcome this
masculine desire for physical superiority and dominance which he had had
for centuries seemed practically impossible. Yet, Miela said, the leaders
of the women now felt that some progress was being made in changing public
sentiment, although so far not a single man had been found who would take
for mate a woman with wings unclipped.

This was partly from personal pride and partly because the laws of the
country made such a union illegal, its parties moral outlaws, its children
illegitimate, and thus not entitled to the government benefits bestowed
upon all offspring of legitimate parentage. It was this man-made law the
women were fighting, and of recent years fighting more and more
militantly.

This was the situation when Tao suddenly projected himself into public
affairs as the leader of a new movement. Tao had paid court to Miela
without success. He was active in the fight against the woman movement--a
brilliant orator, crafty, unscrupulous, a good leader. Leadership was to
him purely a matter of personal gain. He felt no deep, sincere interest in
any public movement for any other reason.

Interplanetary communication had become of latter years a possibility;
science had invented and perfected the means. So far these vehicles had
only been used for short trips to the outer edge of the atmosphere of
Mercury--trips that were giving scientific men much valuable knowledge of
atmospheric conditions, and which it was thought would ultimately enable
them to counteract the storms and make the Fire Country habitable. No
trips into space had been made.

Tao now came forward with the proposition to undertake a new world
conquest--a conquest of Venus or the earth. These planets recently had
been observed from the vehicles. This, he said, would solve the land
question, which, after all, was more serious than the clipping of women's
wings.

He found many followers--adventurers, principally, to whom the
possibilities for untold personal gain in such a conquest appealed. Then
abruptly the women took part. Dropping for the time their own fight, they
opposed Tao vigorously. If Venus or the earth were inhabited, as it was
thought they were, such an expedition would be a war against humanity. It
would result in the needless destruction of human life.

In this controversy the government of the Light Country remained neutral.
But the women finally won, and Tao and his followers, a number of them men
of science, were all banished by the government, under pressure of popular
sentiment, into the Twilight Country.

Here Tao's project fell upon fertile soil. The Twilight People had every
reason to undertake such a conquest; and Tao became their leader in
preparing for it. These preparations were known in the Light Country. The
government made no effort to prevent them. It was, indeed, rather glad of
the possibility of being rid of its disturbing neighbors.

Only the women were concerned, but they alone could do nothing, since by
principle they were as much opposed to offensive warfare against the
Twilight People as against the possible inhabitants of the earth. Miela
paused at this point in her narrative. The thing was getting clearer to me
now, but I could not reconcile this feeble attempt to conquer the earth
which we were then fighting in Wyoming with the picture she drew. I said
so.

"She hasn't come to that," Alan broke in. "You see, Bob, Tao, with about a
hundred followers, was banished to the Twilight Country a couple of years
ago. There was plenty of brains in the party, scientific men and such.
They had only one vehicle, but they have been at work ever since building
a lot of others.

"This expedition of Tao to Wyoming--with only about a hundred of the
Twilight People with him--is not intended to be an offensive operation at
all. He's only looking the situation over, finding out what they're up
against. They decided before they started that the light-ray would protect
them from anything on earth, and they have only come to look around.

"Right now up there"--Alan leaned forward earnestly, and in the moonlight
I could see the flush on his handsome face--"right now up there in the
Twilight Country of Mercury they're working their damnedest over all kinds
of preparations. This Wyoming business this summer does not mean a thing
Tao will quit it any minute. You'll see. Some morning we'll wake up and
find them gone. Probably they'll destroy their apparatus, and not bother
to take it back.

"And then, in a year or two, they'll be here again. Not one vehicle next
time, but a hundred. They'll land all over the earth at once, not on a
desert--Tao probably only picked that this time to avoid
complications--but in our big cities, New York, Paris, London, all of them
at once. That's what we've got to face.

"If Tao comes back as he plans, we have not got a chance. That's why Miela
stole this little vehicle and, without it being publicly known in Mercury,
came here to warn us. That's what she was after, to help us, risked her
life to warn us people of another world."

Alan stopped abruptly, and, dropping to the floor of the porch beside
Miela, laid his arm across her lap, looking up into her face as though she
were a goddess. She stroked his hair tenderly, and I could see her eyes
were wet with tears.

There was a moment's silence. I could not have known what Professor
Newland and Beth were thinking, but a moment later I understood.

Then I realized the sorrow that was oppressing them both.

"What can be done?" I asked finally.

Alan jumped to his feet. He began pacing up and down the porch before us;
evidently he was laboring under a great nervous excitement.

"There's nothing to be done," he said--"nothing at all--here on earth. We
have not got a chance. It's up there the thing has got to be fought
out--up there on Mercury--to keep them from returning."

Alan paused again. When he resumed his voice was pitched lower, but was
very tense.

"I'm going there, Bob--with Miela."

I heard Professor Newland's sharply indrawn breath, and saw Beth's dear
face suddenly whiten.

"I'm going there to fight it out with them. I may come back; I may not.
But if I am successful, _they_ never will--which is all that matters.

"Miela's mother gave her up to come down here and help us. It is a little
thing to go back there to help us, also. If I can help her people with
their own problems, so much the better."

He pulled Miela to her feet beside him and put his arm protectingly about
her shoulders.

"And Miela is going back to her world as my wife--her body
unmutilated--the first married woman in Mercury with wings as God gave
them to her!"



CHAPTER XI.


TO SAVE THE WORLD.


Two days later Alan and Miela were quietly married in Bay Head. She still
wore the long cloak, and no one could have suspected she was other than a
beautiful stranger in the little community. When we got back home Alan
immediately made her take off the cloak. He wanted us to admire her
wings--to note their long, soft red feathers as she extended them, the
symbol and the tangible evidence of her freedom from male dominance.

She was as sweet about it all as she could be, blushing, as though to
expose the wings, now that she was married, were immodest. And by the way
she regarded Alan, by the gentleness and love in her eyes, I could see she
would never be above the guidance, the dominance, of one man, at least.

The day before their marriage Alan had taken me up the bayou to see the
little silver car in which Miela had come. I was intensely curious to
learn the workings of this strange vehicle. As soon as we were inside I
demanded that Alan explain it all to me in detail.

He smiled.

"That's the remarkable part of it, Bob," he answered. "Miela herself
didn't thoroughly understand either the basic principle or the mechanism
itself when she started down here."

"Good Lord! And she ventured--"

"Tao was already on the point of leaving when she conceived the idea. He
had already made one trip almost to the edge of the earth's atmosphere,
you know, and now was ready to start again."

"That first trip was last November," I said. "Tell me about that. What
were those first light-meteors for?"

"As far as I can gather from what Miela says," Alan answered, "Tao wanted
to make perfectly sure the light-ray would act in our atmosphere. He
came--there were several vehicles they had ready even then--without other
apparatus than those meteors, as we called them. Those he dropped to earth
with the light-ray stored in them. They did discharge it properly--they
seemed effective. The thing was merely a test. Tao was satisfied, and went
back to arrange for this second preliminary venture in which he is engaged
now."

"I understand," I said. "Go on about Miela."

"Well, she and her mother went before the Scientific Society, she calls
it--the men who own and control these vehicles in the Light Country. They
called it suicide. No one could be found to come with her. Lua, her
mother, wanted to, but Miela would not let her take the risk, saying she
was needed more there in her own world.

"As a matter of fact, the thing, while difficult perhaps to understand in
principle, in operation works very simply. Miela knew that, and merely
asked them to show her how to operate it practically. This they did. She
spent two days with them--she learns things rather easily, you know--and
then she was ready."

I waited in amazement.

"For practical purposes all she had to understand was the operation of
these keys. The pressure of the light-ray in these coils"--he was standing
beside a row of wire coils which in the semidarkness I had not noticed
before--"is controlled by the key-switches." He indicated the latter as he
spoke. "They send a current to the outer metal plates of the car which
makes them repel or attract other masses of matter, as desired.

"All that Miela had to understand then was how to operate these keys so as
to keep the base of the vehicle headed toward the earth. They took her to
the outer edge of the atmosphere of Mercury over the Dark Country and
showed her the earth. They have used terrestrial telescopes for
generations, and since the invention of this vehicle telescopes for
celestial observation have been greatly improved.

"All Miela had to do was keep the air in here purified. That is a simple
chemical operation. By using this attractive and repellent force she
allowed the earth's gravity and the repelling power of the sun and Mercury
to drive her here."

He paused.

"But, doesn't she--don't you understand the thing in detail?" I asked
finally.

"I think father and I understand it now better than she does," he
answered. "We have studied it out here and questioned her as closely as
possible. We understand its workings pretty thoroughly. But the exact
nature of the light-ray we do not understand, any more than we understand
electricity. Nor do we understand this metallic substance which when
charged with the current becomes attractive or repellent in varying
degrees."

"Yes," I said. "That I can appreciate."

"Father has a theory about the light-ray," he went on, "which seems rather
reasonable from what we can gather from Miela. The thing seems more like
electricity than anything else, and father thinks now that it is generated
by dynamos on Mercury, similar to those we use here for electricity."

"Along that line," I said, "can you explain why this light-ray, which will
immediately set anything on fire that is combustible, and which acts
through metal, like those artillery shells, for instance, does not seem to
raise the temperature of the ground it strikes to any extent?"

"Because, like electricity, it is dissipated the instant it strikes the
ground. The earth is an inexhaustible storehouse and receptacle for such a
force. That is why the broken country around the Shoshone River protected
Garland and Mantua from its direct rays."

"Tell me about the details of this mechanism," I said, reverting to our
original subject. "You say you understand its workings pretty thoroughly
now."

"Yes, I do," he admitted, "and so does father. But I cannot go into it now
with you. You see," he added hastily, as though he feared to hurt my
feelings, "the scientific men of Mercury--some of them--objected to
Miela's coming, on the ground that the inhabitants of the earth, obtaining
from her a knowledge that would enable them to voyage through space, might
take advantage of that knowledge to undertake an invasion of Mercury.

"As a matter of fact, that was a remote possibility. I could explain to
you all I know about this mechanism without much danger of your ever being
able to build such a car. But Miela promised them that she would use all
possible precautions, in the event of her having any choice in the matter,
to prevent the earth people learning anything about it.

"Father and I have examined everything here closely. But no one else
has--and I am sure Miela would prefer no one else did. You understand,
Bob?"

I did understand; and of course I had to be satisfied with that.

"It seems to me," I said when, later in the day, we were discussing
affairs in Wyoming, "that with things in Mercury as we now know they are,
it would help the situation tremendously if Tao and these Twilight People
with him were prevented from ever returning."

"That's my idea exactly," Professor Newland agreed.

I could see by the look on his face he was holding on to this thought as a
possibility that might make Alan's plan unnecessary.

"I've thought about it constantly," the professor said, "ever since these
facts first came to us through Miela. It would be important. With his
expedition here a total failure, I think we might assume that nothing more
would be done up there in attempting to conquer the earth. I've tried to
make Alan see that we should give the authorities all the information we
have. It might help--something might be accomplished--"

"Nothing would, father," Alan interrupted. "There wouldn't be time. And
even if this expedition of Tao's were destroyed, I don't see why that's
any guarantee another attempt would not be made. Miela doesn't, either,
and she ought to know.

"Besides, don't you see, Bob"--he turned to me earnestly--"I can't have
the eyes of the world turned on Miela and her affairs? Why, think of
it--this little woman sent to Washington, questioned, photographed,
written about, made sport of, perhaps, in the newspapers! And all for
nothing. It is unthinkable."

"You may be right, my boy," said the professor sadly. "I am giving in to
you, but I still--"

"The thing has come to me," said Alan. "A duty--a responsibility put
squarely up to me. I've accepted it. I'll do my best all the way."

A week after Alan and Miela were married the report came that the
Mercutians had suddenly departed, abandoning, after partly destroying,
their apparatus. The world for a few days was in trepidation, fearing a
report that they had landed somewhere else, but no such report came.

Three days later Alan and Miela followed them into space.

Professor Newland, Beth and I went up the bayou with them that morning
they left. We were a solemn little party, none of us seemingly wishing to
voice the thoughts that possessed us all.

Professor Newland never spoke once during the trip. When the moment of
final parting came he kissed Miela quietly, and, pressing Alan's hand,
said simply: "Good luck, my boy. We appreciate what you are doing for us.
Come back, some day, if you can."

Then he faced about abruptly and trudged back to the launch alone, as
pathetic a figure as I have ever seen. We all exchanged our last good-bys,
little Beth in tears clinging to Alan, and then kissing Miela and making
her promise some day to come back with Alan when he had accomplished his
mission.

Then they entered the vehicle. Its heavy door closed. A moment later it
rose silently--slowly at first, then with increasing velocity until we
could see it only as a little speck in the air above us. And then it was
gone.



CHAPTER XII.


THE LANDING ON MERCURY.


_(Narrative continued by Alan Newland.)_


With hardly more than a perceptible tremor our strange vehicle came to
rest upon the surface of Mercury. For a moment Miela and I stood regarding
each other silently. Then she left her station at the levers of the
mechanism and placed her hands gently on my shoulders. "You are welcome,
my husband, here to my world."

I kissed her glowing, earnest face. We had reached our journey's end. My
work was about to begin--upon my own efforts now depended the salvation of
that great world I had left behind. What difficulties, what dangers, would
I have to face, here among the people of this strange planet? I thrilled
with awe at the thought of it; and I prayed God then to hold me firm and
steadfast to my purpose.

Miela must have divined my thoughts, for she said simply: "You will have
great power here, Alan; and it is in my heart that you will succeed."

We slid back one of the heavy metallic curtains and looked out through the
thick glass of the window. It was daylight--a diffused daylight like that
of a cloudy midday on my own earth. An utterly barren waste met my gaze.
We seemed to have landed in a narrow valley. Huge cliffs rose on both
sides to a height of a thousand feet or more.

These cliffs, as well as the floor of the valley itself, shone with a
brilliant glare, even in the half light of the sunless day. They were not
covered with soil, but seemed rather to be almost entirely metallic,
copper in color. The whole visible landscape was devoid of any sign of
vegetation, nor was there a single living thing in sight.

I shuddered at the inhospitable bleakness of it.

"Where are we, Miela?"

She smiled at my tone. It was my first sight of Mercury except vague,
distant glimpses of its surface through the mist coming down.

"You do not like my world?"

She was standing close beside me, and at her smiling words raised one of
her glorious red wings and spread it behind me as though for protection.
Then, becoming serious once more, she answered my question.

"We are fortunate, Alan. It is the Valley of the Sun, in the Light
Country. I know it well. We are very close to the Great City."

I breathed a sigh of relief.

"I'll leave it all to you, little wife. Shall we start at once?"

Her hand pressed mine.

"I shall lead you now," she said. "But afterward--_you_ it will be who
leads _me_--who leads us all."

She crossed to the door fastenings. As she loosed them I remember I heard
a slight hissing sound. Before I could reach her she slid back the door. A
great wave of air rushed in upon us, sweeping us back against the wall. I
clutched at something for support, but the sweep of wind stopped almost at
once.

I had stumbled to my knees. "Miela!" I cried in terror.

She was beside me in an instant, wide-eyed with fear, which even then I
could see was fear only for me.

I struggled to my feet. My head was roaring. All the blood in my body
seemed rushing to my face.

After a moment I felt better. Miela pulled me to a seat.

"I did not think, Alan. The pressure of the air is different here from
your world. It was so wrong of me, for I knew. It was so when I landed
there on your earth."

I had never thought to ask her that, nor had she ever spoken of it to me.
She went on now to tell me how, when first she had opened the door on that
little Florida island, all the air about her seemed rushing away. She had
felt then as one feels transported quickly to the rarified atmosphere of a
great height.

Here the reverse had occurred. We had brought with us, and maintained, an
air density such as that near sea level on earth. But here on Mercury the
air was far denser, and its pressure had rushed in upon us instantly the
door was opened. Miela had been affected to a much less extent than I, and
in consequence recovered far more quickly.

The feeling, after the first nausea, the pressure and pain in my ears and
the roaring in my head, had passed away. A sense of heaviness, an
inability to breathe with accustomed freedom, remained with me for days.

We sat quiet for some minutes, and then left the vehicle. Miela was
dressed now as I had first seen her on the Florida bayou. As we stepped
upon the ground she suddenly tore the veil from her breast, spread her
wings, and, with a laugh of sheer delight, flew rapidly up into the air. I
stood watching her, my heart beating fast. Up--up she went into the gray
haze of the sky. Then I could see her spread her great wings, motionless,
a giant bird soaring over the valley.

A few moments more, and she was again beside me, alighting on the tip of
one toe with perfect poise and grace almost within reach of my hand.

I do not quite know what feelings possessed me at that moment. Perhaps it
was a sense of loss as I saw this woman I loved fly away into the air
while I remained chained to the ground. I cannot tell. But when she came
back, dropping gently down beside me, ethereal and beautiful as an angel
from heaven itself, a sudden rush of love swept over me.

I crushed her to me, glorying in the strength of my arms and the frailness
of her tender little body.

When I released her she looked up into my eyes archly.

"You do not like me to fly? Your wife is free--and, oh, Alan, it is so
good--so good to be back here again where I _can_ fly."

She laughed at my expression.

"You are a man, too--like all the men of my world. That is the feeling you
came here to conquer, Alan--so that the women here may all keep their
wings--and be free."

I think I was just a little ashamed of myself for a moment. But I knew my
feeling had been only human. I _did_ want her to fly, to keep those
beautiful wings. And in that moment they came to represent not only her
freedom, but my trust in her, my very love itself.

I stroked their sleek red feathers gently with my hand.

"I shall never feel that way again, Miela," I said earnestly.

She laughed once more and kissed me, and the look in her eyes told me she
understood.

The landscape, from this wider viewpoint, seemed even more bleak and
desolate than before. The valley was perhaps half a mile broad, and wound
away upward into a bald range of mountains in the distance.

The ground under my feet was like a richly metallic ore. In places it was
wholly metal, smooth and shining like burnished copper. Below us the
valley broadened slightly, falling into what I judged must be open country
where lay the city of our destination.

For some minutes I stood appalled at the scene. I had often been in the
deserts of America, but never have I felt so great a sense of desolation.
Always before it had been the lack of water that made the land so arid;
and always the scene seemed to hold promise of latent fertility, as though
only moisture were needed to make it spring into fruition.

Nothing of the kind was evident here. There was, indeed, no lack of water.
I could see a storm cloud gathering in the distance. The air I was
breathing seemed unwarrantably moist; and all about me on the ground
little pools remained from the last rainfall. But here there was no soil,
not so much even as a grain of sand seemed to exist. The air was warm, as
warm as a midsummer's day in my own land, a peculiarly oppressive, moist
heat.

I had been prepared for this by Miela. I was bareheaded, since there never
was to be direct sunlight. My feet were clad in low shoes with rubber
soles. I wore socks. For the rest, I had on simply one of my old pairs of
short, white running pants and a sleeveless running shirt. With the
exception of the shoes it was exactly the costume I had worn in the races
at college.

I had been standing motionless, hardly more than a step from the car in
which we had landed. Suddenly, in the midst of my meditations on the
strange scene about me, Miela said: "Go there, Alan."

She was smiling and pointing to a little rise of ground near by. I looked
at her blankly.

"Jump, Alan," she added.

The spot to which she pointed was perhaps forty feet away. I knew what she
meant, and, stepping back a few paces, came running forward and leaped
into the air. I cleared the intervening space with no more effort than I
could have jumped less than half that distance on earth.

Miela flew over beside me.

"You see, Alan, my husband, it is not so bad, perhaps, that I can fly."

She was smiling whimsically, but I could see her eyes were full of pride.

"There is no other man on Mercury who could do that, Alan," she added.

I tried successive leaps then, always with the same result. I calculated
that here the pull of gravity must be something less than one-half that on
the earth. It was far more than father had believed.

Miela watched my antics, laughing and clapping her hands with delight. I
found I tired very quickly--that is, I was winded. This I attributed to
the greater density of the air I was breathing.

In five minutes I was back at Miela's side, panting heavily.

"If I can--ever get so I breathe right--" I said.

She nodded. "A very little time, I think."

I sat down for a moment to recover my breath. Miela explained then that we
were some ten miles from the fertile country surrounding the city in which
her mother lived, and about fifteen miles from the outskirts of the city
itself. I give these distances as they would be measured on earth. We
decided to start at once. We took nothing with us. The journey would be a
short one, and we could easily return at some future time for what we had
left behind. We needed no food for so short a trip, and plenty of water
was at hand.

Only one thing Miela would not part with--the single memento she had
brought from earth to her mother. She refused to let me touch it, but
insisted on carrying it herself, guarding it jealously.

It was Beth's little ivory hand mirror!

We started off. Miela had wound the filmy scarf about her shoulders again
with a pretty little gesture.

"I need not use wings, Alan, when I am with you. We shall go together, you
and I--on the ground."

And then, as I started off vigorously, she added plaintively from behind
me: "If--if you will go slow, my husband, or will wait for me."

I altered my pace to suit hers. I had quite recovered my breath now, and
for the moment felt that I could carry her much faster than she could
walk. I did gather her into my arms once, and ran forward briskly, while
she laughed and struggled with me to be put down. She seemed no more than
a little child in my arms; but, as before, the heavy air so oppressed me
that in a few moments I was glad enough to set her again upon her feet.

The valley broadened steadily as we advanced. For several miles the look
of the ground remained unchanged. I wondered what curious sort of metal
this might be--so like copper in appearance. I doubted if it were copper,
since even in this hot, moist air it seemed to have no property of
oxidation.

I asked Miela about it, and she gave me its Mercutian name at once; but of
course that helped me not a bit. She added that outcroppings of it, almost
in the pure state, like the great deposits of native copper I had seen on
earth, occurred in many parts of Mercury.

I remembered then Bob Trevor's mention of it as the metal of the apparatus
used by the invaders of Wyoming.

We went on three or four miles without encountering a single sign of life.
No insects stirred underfoot; no birds flew overhead. We might have
been--by the look of it--alone on a dead planet.

"Is none of your mountain country inhabited, Miela?" I asked.

She shook her head.

"Only on the plains do people live. There is very little of good land in
the Light Country, and so many people. That it is which has caused much
trouble in the past. It is for that, many times, the Twilight People have
made war upon us."

I found myself constantly able to breathe more easily. Our progress down
the valley seemed now irritatingly slow, for I felt I could walk or run
three times faster than Miela. Finally I suggested to her that she fly,
keeping near me; and that I would make the best speed forward I could. She
stared at me quizzically. Then, seeing I was quite sincere, she flung her
little arms up about my neck and pulled me down to kiss her.

"Oh, Alan--the very best husband in all the universe, you are. None other
could there be--like you."

She had just taken off her scarf again when suddenly I noticed a little
speck in the sky ahead. It might have been a tiny bird, flying toward us
from the plains below.

"Miela--look!"

She followed the direction of my hand. The speck grew rapidly larger.

"A girl, Alan," she said after a moment. "Let us wait."

We stood silent, watching. It was indeed a girl, flying over the valley
some two or three hundred feet above the ground. As she came closer I saw
her wings were blue, not red like Miela's. She came directly toward us.

Suddenly Miela gave a little cry.

"Anina! Anina!"

Without a word to me she spread her wings and flew up to meet the oncoming
girl.

I stood in awe as I watched them. They met almost above me, and I could
see them hovering with clasped hands while they touched cheeks in
affectionate greeting. Then, releasing each other, they flew rapidly away
together--smaller and smaller, until a turn in the valley hid them
entirely from my sight.

I sat down abruptly. A lump was in my throat, a dismal lonesomeness in my
heart. I knew Miela would return in a moment--that she had met some friend
or relative--yet I could not suppress the vague feeling of sorrow and the
knowledge of my own incapacity that swept over me.

For the first time then I wanted wings--wanted them myself--that I might
join this wife I loved in her glorious freedom of the air. And I realized,
too, for the first time, how that condition Miela so deplored on Mercury
had come to pass. I could understand now very easily how it was that
married women were deprived by their husbands of these wings which they
themselves were denied by the Creator.

Hardly more than ten minutes had passed before I saw the two girls again
flying toward me. They alighted a short distance away, and approached me,
hand in hand.

The girl with Miela, I could see now, was somewhat shorter, even slighter
of build, and two or three years younger. Her face held the same delicate,
wistful beauty. The two girls strongly resembled one another in feature.
The newcomer was dressed in similar fashion to Miela--sandals on her feet,
and silken trousers of a silvery white, fastened at the ankles with golden
cords.

Her wings, as I have said, were blue--a delight light blue that, as I
afterward noticed, matched her eyes. Her hair was the color of spun gold;
she wore it in two long, thick braids over her shoulders and fastened at
the waist and knee. She was, in very truth, the most ethereal human being
I had ever beheld. And--next to Miela--the most beautiful.

Miela pulled her forward, and she came on, blushing with the sweet shyness
of a child. She was winding her silken silver scarf about her breast
hastily, as best she could with her free hand.

"My sister, Anina--Alan," said Miela simply.

The girl stood undecided; then, evidently obeying Miela's swift words of
instruction, she stood up on tiptoe, put her arms about my neck, and
kissed me full on the lips.

Miela laughed gayly.

"You must love her very much, Alan. And she--your little sister--will love
you, too. She is very sweet."

Then her face sobered suddenly.

"Tao has returned, Alan. And he has sent messengers to our city. They are
appealing to our people to join Tao in his great conquest. They say Tao
has here with him, on Mercury, a captive earthman, with wonderful strength
of body, who will help in the destruction of his own world!"



CHAPTER XIII.


THE CAPTIVE EARTH-MAN.


As we came out of the valley I had my first view of the Great City. It
occupied a huge, mound-shaped circular mountain which rose alone out of
the wide plain that spread before me. As far as I could see extended a
rich muddy soil partially covered with water. A road led out of the
valley, stretching across these wet fields toward the base of the
mountain. It was built on an embankment some eight or ten feet high, of
the red, metallic ore of the mountains.

All along the base of this embankment, with their roots in the water,
graceful trees like palms curved upward over the road. The landscape was
dotted with these and other tropical trees; the scene was, indeed,
essentially tropical.

I wondered at the continued absence of sight of human beings. The fields
were quite evidently under cultivation. A rise of ground off to the left
was ridged with terraces. As we passed on along the road I saw a rude form
of plow standing where it had been left in a field which evidently was
producing rice or something akin to it. Yet there was not a person in
sight. Only ahead in the sky I could see a little cluster of black dots
that Miela said was a group of females hovering about the summit of the
Great City.

"It is the time of sleep now, Alan," she said, in answer to my question.

I had not thought of that. It was broad daylight, but here on Mercury
there was no day or night, but always the same half light, as of a cloudy
day.

The mountain on which the city was built was dotted thickly with palms,
and as we approached I made out the houses of the city, set amid the
trees, with broad streets converging at the top. As we came still closer I
saw that the summit of the mountain was laid out like some beautiful
tropical garden, with a broad, low-lying palace in its center.

When we were still a mile or so away from the outskirts of the city Miela
spoke in her soft native tongue to Anina. The girl smiled at me in
parting, and, unwinding the veil from about her breast, flew into the air.

We stood watching her as she winged her way onward toward the sleeping
city. When she had dwindled to a tiny speck I sighed unconsciously and
turned away; and again Miela smiled at me with comprehension.

We started forward, Miela chattering now like a little child. She seemed
eager to tell me all about the new world of hers I was entering, and there
was indeed so much to tell she was often at a loss what to describe first.

She named the cereal which constituted the only crop to which these marsh
lands were suitable. From her description I made out it was similar to
rice, only of a somewhat larger grain. It formed, she said, the staple
article of food of the nation.

As we approached the base of the Great City mountain the ground began
gradually rising. The drainage thus afforded made it constantly drier as
we advanced. It assumed now more the character of a heavy loam.

Still farther on we began passing occasional houses--the outskirts of the
city itself. They were square, single-story, ugly little buildings, built
of reddish stone and clay, flat-roofed, and raised a foot or two off the
ground on stone pilings. They had large rectangular windows, most of them
open, a few with lattice shades. The doorways stood open without sign of a
door; access to the ground was obtained by a narrow board incline.

Interspersed with these stone houses I saw many single-room shacks,
loosely built of narrow boards from the palm trees, and thatched with
straw. In these, Miela explained, lived poorer people, who worked in the
rice fields for the small land owners.

We reached the base of the mountain proper, and I found myself in a broad
street with houses on both sides. This street seemed to run directly to
the summit of the mountain, sloping upward at a sharp angle. We turned
into it and began our climb into the sleeping city. It was laid out
regularly, all its principal streets running from the base of the mountain
upward to its summit, where they converged in a large open space in which
the castle I have already mentioned was situated. The cross-streets formed
concentric rings about the mountain, at intervals of perhaps five hundred
feet down its sides--small circles near the top, lengthening until at the
base the distance around was, I should judge, ten miles or more.

We climbed upward nearly to the summit; then Miela turned into one of the
cross-streets. I had found the climb tremendously tiring, though Miela
seemed not to notice it unduly, and I was glad enough when we reached this
street which girdled the mountain almost at the same level. We had gone
only a short distance along it, however, when Miela paused before a house
set somewhat back from the road on a terrace.

"My home," she said, and her voice trembled a little with emotion. "_Our_
home it shall be now, Alan, with Lua and Anina, our mother and sister."

A low, bushy hedge separated the street from a garden that surrounded the
house. The building was of stone, two stories in height. It was covered
with a thick vine bearing a profusion of vivid red flowers. On its flat
roof were tiny palm trees, a pergola with trellised vines, and still more
flowers, most of them of the same brilliant red. The whole was surrounded
by a waist-high parapet.

One corner of the roof was covered with thatch--a little nest where one
might be sheltered from the rain, and in which I could see a bed of palm
fiber. At one side of the house a tremendous cluster of bamboo curved
upward and over the roof. A path of chopped coconut husks led from the
street to a short flight of steps in the terrace at the front entrance.

We passed along this path and entered through the open doorway directly
into what I judged was the living room of the dwelling. It was some thirty
feet long and half as broad, with a high ceiling and stone floor. Its
three windows fronted the garden we had just left; in its farther wall a
low archway led into an adjoining room. The furniture consisted only of
two or three small tables and several low, wide couches, all of bamboo.

A woman and the girl Anina rose as we entered. Anina ran toward us
eagerly; the elder woman stood, quietly waiting. She was about forty years
of age, as tall as Miela, but heavier of build. She was dressed in loose
silk trousers, gathered at waist and ankle; and a wide sash that covered
her breast. Her hair was iron gray, cut short at the base of the neck.
From her shoulders I saw hanging a cloak that entirely covered her wings.

As she turned toward us I saw a serious, dignified, wholly patrician face,
with large, kindly dark eyes, a high, intellectual forehead, and a firm
yet sensitive mouth. She was the type of woman one would instinctively
mark for leader.

Miela ran forward to greet her mother, falling upon her knees and touching
her forehead to the elder woman's sandaled feet. As she rose I could see
there were tears in the eyes of them both. Then Miela presented me. I
stood for an instant, confused, not knowing quite what I should do.

Miela laughed her gay little laugh.

"Bow low, Alan--as I did--to our mother."

I knelt to her respectfully, and she put her hands lightly upon my head,
speaking low words of greeting. Then, as I stood up again, I met her eyes
and smiled an answer to the gentle smile on her lips. From that moment I
felt almost as though she were my own mother, and I am sure she took me
then into her heart as her son.

The introduction over, I turned toward one of the windows, leaving Miela
to talk with her mother. Anina followed me, standing timidly by my side,
with her big, curious eyes looking up into my face.

"You're a sweet, dear little sister," I said, "and I _am_ going to love
you very much."

I put my arm about her shoulders, and she smiled as though she understood
me, yielding to my embrace with the ready friendship of a child. For some
moments we stood together, looking out of the window and talking to each
other with words that were quite unintelligible to us both. Then Miela
suddenly called me.

"We shall eat now, Alan," she said, "for you are hungry, I know. And above
there is water, that we may wash." Her face clouded as she went on: "Our
mother has told me a little that has happened. It is very serious, Alan,
as you shall hear. Tao, with his great news of your wonderful world, is
very fast winning over our men to his cause. A revolt, there may be, here
in our own city--a revolution against our government, our king. We can
only look to you now, my husband, to save our country from Tao as well as
your own."

The situation as I found it in the Light Country was, as Miela said,
alarmingly serious. During the two years Tao had been in the Twilight
Country, preparing for his attack upon the earth, his project had caused
little stir among the Light Country people.

Its women were, at first, perturbed at this wanton attack upon the
humanity of another world, but since the earth was such an unknown
quantity, and the fact of its being inhabited at all was problematical,
interest in the affair soon lagged. The government of the Light Country
concerned itself not at all.

But now, upon Tao's return, the news of his venture, as told by the
emissaries he sent to the Light Country, struck its people like a
bombshell. These emissaries--all men--had come to the Great City, and,
finding their presence tolerated by the authorities, had immediately
started haranguing the people.

The men were inclined to listen, and many of them openly declared their
sympathy with Tao. These, however, were for the most part of the poorer,
more ignorant classes, or those more adventurous, less scrupulous
individuals to whom the prospect of sudden riches appealed.

"Why doesn't your government just throw Tao's men out if they're causing
so much trouble?" I asked. "They never should have been allowed in the
country at all."

Miela smiled sadly.

"That is so, my husband. That should have been done; but now it is too
late. Our men would protect them now, declaring their right to stay here
and speak. There might be bloodshed among our people, and that must not
be."

"Are they armed?" I asked.

She shook her head. "No one is armed with the light-ray. To carry it is a
crime punishable by death, for the light is too destructive."

"But Tao has it?"

"Tao has it, indeed, but he is not so great a monster that he would use it
against us."

I was not so sure of that, and I said so. "You don't mean to tell me,
Miela, that your government has allowed Tao to prepare all this
destructive armament without itself arming?"

Again she shook her head. "We have been preparing, too, and all our young
men can be called if occasion comes. But that must never be. It would be
too terrible."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miela and I occupied, that first night on Mercury, a broad wooden bed
built low to the floor, with a mattress of palm fiber. At first I could
not sleep, but lay thinking over the many things she had told me. The
light in the room, too, was strange. Lattice covered the windows, but it
was like trying to sleep at midday; and the heat and heaviness of the air
oppressed me. I dropped off finally, to be awakened by Miela's voice
calling me to breakfast.

We sat down to the morning meal at a low table set with shining plates and
goblets of copper, or whatever the metal was, and napery of silk. The rice
formed our main article of food, with sugar, milk, and a beverage not
unlike coffee. There was also a meat like beef, although more highly
flavored, and a number of sickish sweet fruits of a kind entirely new to
me, which I could do no more than taste.

We were served by a little maid whose darker skin and heavier features
proclaimed her of another race--a native of the Fire Country, Miela told
me. She was dressed in a brown tunic of heavy silk, reaching from waist to
knee. Her thick black hair was cut to her shoulders.

On her left arm above the elbow was welded a broad band of copper
inscribed with a mark to identify Lua as her owner, for she was a slave.
Her torso was bare, except for a cloak like Lua's which hung from her
shoulders in the back to cover her wings. By this I knew she could not
fly.

It was not until some time afterward that I learned the reason for this
covering of the clipped wings. The wing joints were severed just above the
waist line. The feathers on the remaining upper portions were clipped, but
through disuse these feathers gradually dropped out entirely.

The flesh and muscle underneath was repulsive in appearance--for which
reason it was always kept covered. Lua showed me her wings once--mere
shrunken stumps of what had once been her most glorious possession. I did
not wonder then that the women were ready to fight, almost, rather than
part with them.

Difficulties of language made our conversation during the meal somewhat
halting, although Miela acted as interpreter. Lua and Anina both expressed
their immediate determination to learn English, and, with the same
persistence that Miela had shown, they set aside nearly everything else to
accomplish it.

We decided that we should see the king and arrange our future course of
action. Whatever was to be done should be done at once--that we all
agreed--for Tao's men were steadily gaining favor with a portion of the
people, and we had no means of knowing what they would attempt to do.

"What will your people think of me?" I suddenly asked Miela.

"We have sent our king word that you are here," she answered, "and we have
asked that he send a guard to take you to the castle this morning."

"A guard?"

She smiled. "It is better that the people see you first as a man of
importance. You will go to the king under guard. Few will notice you. Then
will he, our ruler, arrange that you are shown to the people as a great
man--one who has come here to help us--one who is trusted and respected by
our king. You see, my husband, the difference?"

I did, indeed, though I wondered a little how I should justify this
exalted position which was being thrust upon me. After breakfast Lua and
Anina busied themselves about the house, while Miela and I went to the
rooftop to wait for the king's summons. From here I had my first really
good view of the city at close range.

Miela's home sat upon a terrace, leveled off on the steep hillside; all
the houses in the vicinity were similarly situated. Behind us the mountain
rose steeply; in front it dropped away, affording an extended view of the
level, palm-dotted country below.

The slope of hillside rising abruptly behind us held another house just
above the level of the rooftop we were on. As I sat there looking idly
about I thought I saw a figure lurking near this higher building. I called
Miela's attention to it--the obscure figure of a man standing against a
huge palm trunk.

As we watched the figure stepped into plainer view. I saw then it _was_ a
man, evidently looking down at us. I stood up. There was no one else in
sight except a woman on the roof of the other house holding an infant.

Something about the man's figure seemed vaguely familiar; my heart leaped
suddenly.

"Miela," I whispered, "surely that--that is no one of your world."

Her hand clutched my arm tightly as the man stepped forward again and
waved at us. I crossed the rooftop, Miela following. At my sudden motion
the man hesitated, then seemed about to run. I hardly know what thoughts
impelled me, but suddenly I shouted: "Wait!"

At the sound of my voice he whirled around, stopped dead an instant, and
then, with an answering call, came running down the hillside.

"The earth-man!" cried Miela. "The earth-man of Tao it must be."

We hurried down through the house and arrived at its back entrance. Coming
toward us at a run across the garden was the man--unmistakably one of my
own world.

My hurried glance showed me he was younger than I--a short, stocky,
red-headed chap, dressed in dirty white duck trousers and a torn white
linen shirt.

He came on at full speed.

"Hello!" I called.

He stopped abruptly. For an instant we stared at each other; then he
grinned broadly.

"Well, I don't know who _you_ are," he ejaculated, "but I want to say it
certainly does me good to see you."



CHAPTER XIV.


THE RULER OF THE LIGHT COUNTRY.


However pleased the newcomer was to see me, I had no difficulty in
assuring him with equal truth that my feelings matched his. The first
surprise of the meeting over, we took him to the living room, where Lua
greeted him with dignified courtesy, and we all gathered around to hear
his story.

He was, I saw now, not more than twenty years old, rather short--perhaps
five feet six or seven inches--and powerfully built, with a shock of
tousled red hair and a handsome, rough-hewn face essentially masculine.

He seemed to be an extraordinarily good-humored chap, with the ready wit
of an Irishman. I liked him at once--I think we all did.

He began, characteristically, near the end rather than the beginning of
the events I knew he must have to tell us.

"I got away," he chuckled, grinning more broadly than ever. "But where I
was going to, search me. And who the deuce are _you_, if you don't mind my
asking? How did you ever get to this God-forsaken place?"

I smiled. "You tell us about yourself first; then I'll tell you about
myself. You are the earth-man we've been hearing about, aren't you--the
man Tao captured in Wyoming and brought here with him?"

"They caught me in Wyoming all right. Who's Tao?"

"He's the leader of them all."

"Oh. Well, they brought me here, as you say, and I guess they've had me
about all over this little earth since. They stuck me in a boat, and Lord
knows how far we went. We got here last night, and when my guard went to
sleep I beat it." He scratched his head lugubriously. "Though what good I
thought it was going to do me I don't know. That's about all, I guess.
Who the deuce are you?"

I laughed.

"Wait a minute--don't go so fast. Start at the beginning. What's your
name?"

"Oliver Mercer."

His face grew suddenly grave. "My brother was killed up there in
Wyoming--that's how I happened to go there in the first place."

"Mercer!" I exclaimed.

He started. "Yes--why? You don't think you know me, by any chance, do
you?"

"No, but I knew your brother--that is, I know Bob Trevor, who was with him
when he was killed. He's one of my best friends."

The young fellow extended his hand. "A friend of Bob Trevor's--away off
here! Don't it get you, just?"

Miela interrupted us here to translate to her mother and Anina what he
said.

Mercer went on: "The assumption is, you people here are not working with
this gang of crooks I got away from--this Tao? Am I right in thinking so?"

"You're certainly right, that far," I laughed.

I felt, more than I can say, a great sense of relief, a lessening of the
tension, the unconscious strain I had been under, at this swift, jovial
conversation with another human of my own kind.

"Yes, you're right on that. This Tao and I are not exactly on the same
side. I'll tell you all about it in a minute."

"Then, we're working together?"

"Yes."

"Well, all I'm working for is to get back home where I came from."

"You won't be when you hear all I've got to say."

He started at that; then, with sudden change of thought, his eyes turned
to Anina. The girl blushed under his admiring gaze.

"Say, she's a little beauty, isn't she? Who is she?"

"She's my sister," I said, smiling.

For once he was too dumfounded to reply.

Miela had finished her translation now, and, as she turned back to us,
spoke in English for the first time during the conversation.

"Do you know why it is they brought you here from the Twilight Country?"
she asked Mercer.

This gave him another shock. "Why, I--no. That is--say, how do you happen
to talk English? Is it one of your languages here, by any chance?"

Miela laughed gayly.

"Only we three, in all this world, speak English. I know it because--"

I interrupted her.

"Suppose I tell him our whole story, Miela? Then--"

"That's certainly what I want to hear," said Mercer emphatically. "And
especially why it is that I'm not supposed to want to get back to where I
belong."

My explanation must have lasted nearly an hour, punctuated by many
questions and exclamations of wonder from young Mercer. I told him the
whole affair in detail, and ended with a statement of exactly how matters
stood now on Mercury.

"Do you want to hurry back home to earth now?" I finished.

"Duck out of this? I should say not. Why, we've got a million things to do
here."

His eyes turned again toward Anina.

"And, say--about letting those girls keep their wings. I'm strong for
that. Let's be sure and fix that up before we leave."

It was not more than half an hour later when the king's guards arrived to
conduct us to the castle. Meanwhile young Mercer had discovered he was
hungry and thirsty. As soon as he had finished eating we started off--he
and I, with Lua and Miela. The guards led us away as though we were
prisoners, forming a hollow square--there were some thirty of them--with
us in the center. We attracted little attention from passersby; the few
who stopped to stare at us, or who attempted to follow, were briskly
ordered away.

Occasionally a few girls would hover overhead, but when the guards shouted
up at them they flew away obediently.

The king's castle was constructed of metal and stone--a long, low,
rambling structure, flanked by two spires or minarets, giving it somewhat
an Oriental appearance. Each of these minarets was girdled, halfway up, by
a narrow balcony.

The first room into which we passed was small, seemingly an antechamber.
From it, announced by two other guards who stood at the entrance, we
entered directly into the main hall of the building. At one end of it
there was a raised platform. On this, seated about a large table, were
some ten or twelve dignitaries--the king's advisers. They were, I saw, all
aged men, with beardless, seamed faces, long snowy-white hair to their
shoulders, and dressed in flowing silk robes.

The king was a man of seventy-odd, kindly faced, gentle in demeanor. He
bore himself with the dignity of a born ruler, and yet his very kindliness
of aspect and the doddering gravity of his aged councilors, seemed to
explain at once most of the trouble that now confronted him.

We stood beside this table--they courteously made way for Lua to sit among
them--and all its occupants immediately turned to face us.

Our audience lasted perhaps an hour and a half altogether. I need not go
into details. I was right in assuming that the king desired to help us
prevent Tao from his attempted conquest of the earth. This was so, but
only in so far as his actions would not jeopardize the peace of his own
nation. He sadly admitted his error in allowing Tao's emissaries into the
Light Country. But now they were there, he did not see how to get them
out.

His people were daily listening to them more eagerly; and, what was worse,
the police guards themselves seemed rather more in sympathy with them than
otherwise. A slight disturbance had occurred in the streets the day
before, and the guards had stood apathetically by, taking no part. Above
all else, the king stoutly protested, he would have no bloodshed in his
country if he could prevent it.

In the neighboring towns of the Light Country--the nearest of which was
some forty miles away from the Great City--the situation was almost the
same. Reports brought by young women flying between the cities said that
to many Tao also had sent emissaries who were fast winning converts to his
cause.

"Do all these people who believe in Tao expect to go to our earth when it
is conquered?" I asked Miela. "How can they--so many of them--hope to
benefit in that way? Aren't they satisfied here?"

Miela smiled sadly.

"No people can ever be satisfied--all of them. That you must know, my
husband. They have many grievances against our ruler. Many things they
want which he cannot give. Tao may promise these things--and if they
believe his promise it is very bad."

"He might come over here and try to make himself king," Mercer said
suddenly. "If it's like that maybe he could do it, too, with this grand
earth-conquest getting ready. Tell the king that--see what he says."

"He says that he realizes and fears it," Miela answered. "But he thinks
that first Tao will go to your earth, and he may never come back. So much
may happen--"

"So he's just going to wait," I explained. "Well, _we're_ not just going
to wait. Ask the king what our status is."

"Ask him about me," Mercer put in. "Are those Tao men going to grab me the
minute I show my face on the street, or will he protect me?"

Miela translated this to the king, adding something of her own to which he
evidently agreed.

"It is as I thought," she said. "He believes he can present you to the
people as men of earth who are our guests, and that they will accept you
in friendly spirit, most of them."

The king spoke to one of his advisers, who abruptly left the room.

"He will call the people now," Miela went on, "and will speak to them from
the tower--all who can leave their tasks to come. You will stand there
with him. He will ask that we of the Light Country allow you to remain
here in peace among us. And this captive earth man of Tao's"--she laid her
hand lightly on Mercer's shoulder--"he will ask, too, that he be given
sanctuary among us. Our people still are kindly--most of them--and they
will see the justice of what he asks."

I suggested then that Miela tell the king that we had determined, if we
could, to frustrate Tao in his plans; and showed her how to point out to
him that such an outcome would, if successful, make his throne secure and
insure peace for his nation.

He asked me bluntly what it was I thought I could do. The vague beginnings
of a plan were forming in my mind. "Tell him, Miela, I think we can rid
the Light Country of Tao's emissaries--send them back--without causing any
disturbances among the people. Ask him if that would not be a good thing."

The king nodded gravely as this was translated.

"He asks you how?" Miela said next.

"Tell him, Miela, that there are some things that might happen of which he
would be very glad, but which it might be better he did not know. You
understand. Make him see that we will be responsible for this--that he
needn't have anything to do with it or know anything about it. Then, if we
do anything wrong against your laws, he will be perfectly safe in stopping
and punishing us."

Miela nodded, and began swiftly telling this to the king. As she spoke I
saw his eyes twinkle and a swift little series of nods from the aged men
about the table made me know that I had carried my point. During the
latter part of this talk I had noticed the growing murmur of voices
outside the castle. The old man who had left the room at the king's order
came back.

"The people now are gathering," Miela said. "In a moment we shall go up
into the tower."

The king's councilors now rose and withdrew, and a few moments later the
king, without formality, led the four of us through the castle and up into
the tower.

We climbed a little stone staircase in the tower and came into a circular
room some sixty feet above the ground. A small doorway from this room gave
access to the narrow balcony which girdled the tower. The sounds of the
gathering crowd came up plainly from the gardens below. We waited for a
time, and then, at a sign from the king, stepped together upon the
balcony.

The gardens below were full of people--gathered among the palms and moving
about for points of vantage from which to obtain a view of the balcony.
Most of them were men and older women. The girls were, nearly all of them,
in the air, flying about the tower and hovering near the balcony, staring
at us curiously. The women were, for the most part, dressed as I have
described Lua.

The men wore knee-length trousers of fabric or leather, and sometimes a
shirt or leather jacket, although a difference of costume that made
evident the rank of the wearer was noticeable in both sexes. All were
bareheaded, with the exception of the king's guards, who were thus plainly
distinguishable, standing idly about among the crowd.

As we stepped out into view of the people a louder murmur arose, mingled
with a ripple of applause. Three or four girls, hovering only a few feet
in front of us, clapped their hands and laughed. The king placed Mercer
and me on either side of him, and, standing with his hands on our
shoulders, leaned over the balcony rail and began to speak.

A silence fell over the crowd; they listened quietly, but with none of
that respect and awe with which a people usually faces its king.

Miela whispered to me. "He is telling them about your earth, and that you
came here to visit us in friendly spirit."

There were some murmurs of dissent as the king proceeded, and once some
bolder individual shouted up a question, at which a wave of laughter
arose. As it died away, and the crowd appeared to listen to the king's
next words, a stone suddenly came whirling up from below, narrowly missing
the king's head. A sudden hush fell over the people at this hostile act;
then a tumult of shouting broke loose, and a commotion off to one side
showed where the offender was standing.

Mercer wheeled toward me, his face white with anger.

"Who did that--did you see him? Which one was it?"

The king began to speak, as if nothing had occurred, and an instant later
several more stones whistled past us. The commotion in the crowd grew more
violent, but it was evident that a great majority of the people were
against this demonstration.

"It is better we go inside," Miela said quietly.

The king was shouting down to his guards now, but they stood apathetically
by, taking no part.

Another stone hurtled past us, striking the tower and falling at our feet.
The king abruptly ceased his shouting and left the balcony. As he passed
me and I glanced into his frightened face I felt a sudden sense of pity
for this gentle, kindly old man, so well-meaning, but so utterly
ineffective as a ruler.

I was about to pull Miela back into the room when a girl flew up to the
balcony railing. As she balanced herself upon it I saw it was Anina. She
said something to Miela, who turned swiftly to me.

"She is right, my husband. We must not leave the matter like this. They
can have no confidence in you--our women most of all--if you do not do
something now. A sign of your strength now would make them respect
you--perhaps one of those who threw the stones you could punish."

I knew she was right. Most of the crowd was with us. If we retreated now,
those against us would grow bolder--our appearance on the street might at
any time be dangerous. But if now we proved ourselves superior in
strength, the popular sentiment in our favor would be just that much
stronger. At least, that is the way it seemed to me.

I did not need to ask Mercer's opinion, for at Miela's words he
immediately said: "That's my idea. Just give me a chance at them."

He leaned over the balcony. "How are we going to get down there? It's too
far to drop."

Miela spoke to Anina, and they both flew away. In a moment they were back
with two other girls. All four clung to the outside of the balcony
railing, and formed a cross with their joined hands. Into this little seat
of their arms I clambered. My weight was too great for them to have lifted
me up, but they fluttered safely with me to the ground, landing in a heap
among the people, who had cleared a space to receive us. As soon as I was
upon my feet the girls flew back for Mercer, and in a moment more he was
beside me.

"If we only knew who threw those stones," I said.

I stood erect, and my greater height enabled me to see over the heads of
the people easily.

Miela laid her hand on my arm.

"One of them I know. His name is Baar, a bad character. He has caused much
trouble in the past."

She then told me hastily that she and Anina would fly up and seek him out.
Mercer and I were to follow them through the crowd on the ground.

The throng was pushing close about us now, although those nearest us tried
to keep away as best they could. Miela and Anina flew up over our heads,
and, side by side, Mercer and I started off. The people struggled back
before our advance, striving to make a path for us. At times the press of
those behind made it impossible for them to give us room. We did not
hesitate, but shoved our way forward, elbowing them away roughly.

Suddenly, some twenty feet ahead of us, I saw Miela and Anina come to the
ground, and in a moment more we were with them again.

The crowd was less dense here, and about us there was a considerable open
space, Miela pointed out a man leaning against the trunk of a palm tree
near by and glaring at us malevolently.

"That is he," she said quietly. "A very bad man--this Baar--whom many
would like to see punished."

Mercer jumped forward, but I swept him back with my arm.

"Leave him to me," I said. "You stand here by the girls. If I need you,
I'll shout."

The man by the tree was a squat little individual, some five feet three or
four inches tall, and extraordinarily broad. He was bareheaded, with black
hair falling to his shoulders. He was naked to the waist, exposing a
powerful torso. His single garment was the usual knee-length trousers. I
thought I had never seen so evil a face as his, as he stood there, holding
his ground before my slow advance, and leering at me. His cheek bones were
high, his jowls heavy, his little eyes set wide apart. His nose was flat,
as though it had once been broken.

I went straight up to him, and he did not move. There were certainly three
hundred people watching us as I stood there facing him.

"You threw a stone at your king," I said to him sternly, although I knew
perfectly well he could not understand my words. "You shall be punished."

I reached out suddenly and struck him in the face as smartly as I could
with the flat of my hand. He gave a roar of surprise and pain, and as soon
as he could recover from my blow lunged at me with a snarl of rage.

As he came I turned and darted swiftly away. I heard a shout of surprise
from Mercer. "It's all right," he called. "Wait."

I ran about twenty feet, then turned and waited. The man came on, head
down, charging like a mad bull. When he was close upon me I gathered my
muscles and sprang clear over his head, landing well behind him.

He stopped and looked around confusedly, evidently not quite sure at first
what had become of me.

Mercer gave a shout of glee, and, to my great satisfaction, I heard it
taken up by the crowd, mingled with murmurs of surprise and awe.

I stood quiet, and again my opponent charged me. I eluded him easily, and
then for fully ten minutes I taunted and baited him this way, as a
skillful toreador taunts his bull. The crowd now seemed to enjoy the
affair hugely.

Finally I darted behind my adversary and, catching him by the shoulders,
tripped him and laid him on his back on the ground A great roar of
laughter went up from the onlookers.

The man was on his feet again in an instant, breathing heavily, for indeed
he had nearly winded himself by his exertions. I ran over to Mercer.

"Go on," I said; "show them what you can do."

The commotion of this contest had drawn many other spectators about us
now, but they kept a space clear, pushing back hurriedly before our sudden
rushes. At my words Mercer darted forward eagerly. His first move was to
leap some twenty feet across the open space. This smaller opponent seemed
to give the Mercutian new courage.

He shouted exultantly and dashed at Mercer, who stood quietly waiting for
him at the edge of the crowd.

Mercer's ideas evidently were different from mine, for as his adversary
came within reach he stepped nimbly aside and hit him a vicious blow in
the face. The man toppled over backward and lay still.

I ran over to where Mercer was bending over his fallen foe. As I came up
he straightened and grinned at me. "Oh, shucks," he said disgustedly. "You
can't fight up here--it's too easy."



CHAPTER XV.


THE MOUNTAIN CONCLAVE.


"It is reasonable," Miela said thoughtfully. "And that our women will help
as you say--of that I am sure."

We were gathered in the living room after the evening meal, and I had
given them my ideas of how we should start meeting the situation that
confronted us. We had had no more trouble that day. After the encounter in
the king's garden Mercer and I had followed the two girls swiftly home. We
were not molested in the streets, although the people crowded about us
wherever we went.

"Why did none of Baar's friends come to his rescue up there in the
garden?" I asked Miela. "Surely there must have been many of them about."

"They were afraid, perhaps," she answered. "And they knew the people were
against them. There might have been serious trouble; for that is not their
way--to fight in the open."

Her face became very grave. "We must be very careful, my husband, that
they, or Tao's men do not come here to harm you while you sleep."

"Why do you suppose they ever happened to bring me here in the first
place?" Mercer wanted to know. "That's what I can't figure out."

"They knew not that Alan was here," said Miela. "I think they wanted to
show you to our people as their captive--one of the earth-men."

Mercer chuckled.

"They didn't know what a good runner I was, or they'd never have taken a
chance like that."

I told Miela then my plan for enlisting the sympathy of the women of the
Light Country and for securing the active coperation of the girls in
ridding us of the disturbing presence of these Tao emissaries.

We planned that whatever we did should be in secret, so far as possible.
Mercer and I talked together, while Miela consulted with Lua at length.

I explained to Mercer that Tao might at any time send an expedition to
invade the Light Country.

"How about that car we came from earth in?" he suggested. "He could sail
over in that, couldn't he--if he should want to come over here?"

I knew that was not feasible. In the outer realms of space the balancing
attractions of the different heavenly bodies made it easy enough to head
in any specified direction; but for travel over a planet's surface it was
quite impractical. Its rise and fall could be perfectly governed; but when
it was directed laterally the case was very different. Just where it would
go could not be determined with enough exactness.

Miela turned back to us from her consultation with Lua.

"In the mountains, high up and far beyond the Valley of the Sun," she
said, "lies a secret place known only to our women. Our mother says that
she and I and Anina can spread the news among our virgins to gather there
to-morrow at the time of sleep. Only to those we know we can trust will we
speak--and they will have no men to whom to tell our plans. To-morrow they
will gather up there in the clouds, among the crags, unseen by prying
eyes. And you and our--our friend Ollie"--she smiled as she used the
nickname by which he had asked her to call him--"you two we will take
there by the method you have told us. We will arrange, up there in secret,
what it is we are to do to help our world and yours."

This, in effect, was our immediate plan of procedure. Nearly all the next
day Mercer and I stayed about the house, while the three women went
through the city quietly, calling forth all those they could reach to our
conclave in the mountains.

They returned some time after midday. Miela came first, alighting with a
swift, triumphant swoop upon the roof where Mercer and I were sitting.

One glance at her face told me she had been successful.

"They will come, my husband," she announced. "And they are ready and
eager, all of them, to do what they can."

Anina and Lua brought the same news. When we were all together again
Mercer and I took them to the garden behind the house and showed them what
we had done while they were away.

It was my plan to have the girls carry Mercer and me through the air with
them. For that purpose we had built a platform of bamboo, which now lay
ready in the garden.

Miela clapped her hands at sight of it. "That is perfect, my husband. No
difficulty will there be in taking you with us now."

The platform was six feet wide by ten long. It rested upon a frame with
two poles of bamboo some forty feet in length running lengthwise along its
edges. These two poles thus projected in front and back of the platform
fifteen feet each way. Running under them crosswise at intervals were
other, shorter bamboo lengths which projected out the sides a few feet to
form handles. There were ten of them on a side at intervals of four feet.

I found it difficult to realize the difference between night and day,
since here on Mercury the light never changed. I longed now for that
darkness of our own earth which would make it so much easier for us to
conceal our movements. Miela relieved my mind on that score, however, by
explaining that at nearly the same hour almost every one in the city fell
asleep. The physical desire for sleep was, I learned, much stronger with
the Mercutians than with us; and only by the drinking of a certain
medicinal beverage could they ward it off.

It was after the evening meal, at a time which might have corresponded to
an hour or so before midnight, that the selected eighteen girls began to
arrive. Miela brought them into the living room with us until they were
all together.

It was a curious gathering--this bevy of Mercutian maidens. They all
seemed between the ages of sixteen and twenty-three--fragile, dainty
little wisps of femininity, yet having a strength in their highly
developed wing muscles that was truly surprising.

They were dressed in the characteristic costume I have described, with
only a slight divergence of color or ornamentation. They were of only two
types--jet black tresses, black eyes, and red-feathered wings like Miela;
or the less vivid, more ethereal Anina--blue-eyed, golden-haired, with
wing feathers of light blue.

When they had all arrived we went into the garden behind the house. In a
moment more Mercer and I were seated side by side on the little bamboo
platform. Miela and Anina took the center positions so that they would be
near us. The other girls ranged themselves along the sides, each grasping
one of the handles.

In another moment we were in the air. My first sensation was one of a
sudden rushing forward and upward. The frail little craft swayed under me
alarmingly, but I soon grew used to that. The flapping of those many pairs
of huge wings so close was very loud; the wind of our swift forward flight
whistled past my ears. Looking down over the side of the platform, between
the bodies of two of the girls, I could see the city silently dropping
away beneath us. Above there was nothing but the same dead gray sky, black
in front, with occasional vivid lightning flashes and the rumble of
distant thunder.

Underneath the storm cloud, far ahead, the jagged tops of a range of
mountains projected above the horizon. As I watched they seemed slowly
creeping up and forward as the horizon rolled back to meet them.

For half an hour or so we sped onward through the air. We were over the
mountains now. Great jagged, naked peaks of shining metal towered above
us, with that broken, utterly desolate country beneath. We swept
continually upward, for the mountains rose steadily in broad serrated
ranks before us.

Occasionally we would speed up a narrow defile, with the broken, tumbling
cliffs rising abruptly over our heads, only to come out above a level
plateau or across a caon a thousand feet deep or more.

The storm broke upon us. We entered a cloud that wrapped us in its wet
mist and hid the mountains from our sight. The darkness of twilight
settled down, lighted by flashes of lightning darting almost over our
heads. The sharp cracks of thunder so close threatened to split my
eardrums.

The wind increased in violence. The little platform trembled and swayed. I
could see the girls struggling to hold it firm. At times we would drop
abruptly straight down a hundred or two hundred feet, with a great
fluttering of wings; but all the time I knew we were rising sharply.

Mercer and I clung tightly to the platform. We did not speak, and I think
both of us were frightened. Certainly we were awed by the experience.
After a time--I have no idea how long--we passed through the storm and
came again into the open air with the same gray sky above us.

We were several thousand feet up now, flying over what seemed to be a
tumbling mass of small volcanic craters. In front of us rose a sheer cliff
wall, extending to the right and left to the horizon. We passed over its
rim, and I saw that it curved slightly inward, forming the circumference
of a huge circle.

The inner floor was hardly more than a thousand feet down, and seemed
fairly level. We continued on, arriving finally over the mouth of a little
circular pit. This formed an inner valley, half a mile across and with
sheer side walls some five hundred feet high. As we swung down into it I
noticed above the horizon behind us a number of tiny black dots in the
sky--other girls flying out from the city to our meeting.

I have never beheld so wild, so completely desolate a scene. The ground
here was that same shining mass of virgin metal, tumbled about and broken
up in hopeless confusion.

Great rugged bowlders lay strewn about; tiny caverns yawned; fissures
opened up their unknown depths; sharp-pointed crags reared their heads
like spires left standing amid the ruins of some huge cathedral. There
was, indeed, hardly a level spot of ground in sight.

I wondered with vague alarm where we should land, for nowhere could I see
sufficient space, even for our small platform. We were following closely
the line of cliff wall when suddenly we swooped sharply downward and to
the right with incredible speed. My heart leaped when, for an instant, I
thought something had gone wrong. Then the forward end of the platform
tilted abruptly upward; there was a sudden, momentary fluttering of wings,
a scrambling as the girls' feet touched the ground, and we settled back
and came to rest with hardly more than a slight jar.

Miela stood up, rubbing her arms, which must have ached from her efforts.

"We are here, Alan--safely, as we planned."

We had landed on a little rocky niche that seemed to be in front of the
opening of a small cave mouth in the precipitous cliffside. I stood up
unsteadily, for I was cramped and stiff, and the solid earth seemed
swaying beneath me. I was standing on what was hardly more that a narrow
shelf, not over fifteen feet wide and some thirty feet above the base of
the cliff.

Mercer was beside me, looking about him with obvious awe.

"What a place!" he ejaculated.

We stepped cautiously to the brink of the ledge and peered over.
Underneath us, with the vertical wall of the cliff running directly down
into it, spread a small pool of some heavy, viscous fluid, inky black, and
with iridescent colors floating upon its surface. It bubbled and boiled
lazily, and we could feel its heat on our faces plainly.

Beyond the pool, not more than a hundred yards across, lay a mass of
ragged bowlders piled together in inextricable confusion; beyond these a
chasm with steam rising from it, whose bottom I could not see--a crack as
though the ground had suddenly cooled and split apart. Across the entire
surface of this little cliff-bound circular valley it was the same, as
though here a tortured nature had undergone some terrible agony in the
birth of this world.

The scene, which indeed had something infernal about it, would have been
extraordinary enough by itself; but what made it even more so was the fact
that several hundred girls were perched among these crags, sitting idle,
or standing up and flapping their wings like giant birds, and more were
momentarily swooping in from above. I had, for an instant, the feeling
that I was Dante, surveying the lower regions, and that here was a host of
angels from heaven invading them.

During the next hour fully a thousand girls arrived. There were perhaps
fifteen hundred altogether, and only a few stragglers were hastily flying
in when we decided to wait no longer.

Miela flew out around the little valley, calling them to come closer. They
came flying toward us and crowded upon the nearer crags just beyond the
pool, clutching the precipitous sides, and scrambling for a foothold
wherever they could. A hundred or more found place on the ledge with us,
or above or below it wherever a slight footing could be found on the wall
of the cliff.

When they were all settled, and the scrambling and flapping of wings had
ceased, Miela stood up and addressed them. A solemn, almost sinister hush
lay over the valley, and her voice carried far. She spoke hardly above the
ordinary tone, earnestly, and occasionally with considerable emphasis, as
though to drive home some important point.

For nearly half an hour she spoke without a break, then she called me to
her side and put one of her wings caressingly about my shoulders. I did
not know what she said, but a great wave of handclapping and flapping of
wings answered her. She turned to me with glowing face.

"I have told them about your wonderful earth, and Tao's evil plans; and
just now I said that you were my husband--and I, a wife, can still fly as
well as they. That is a very wonderful thing, Alan. No woman ever, in this
world, has been so blessed as I. They realize that--and they respect me
and love you for it."

She did not wait for me to speak, but again addressed the assembled girls.
When she paused a chorus of shouts answered her. Many of the girls in
their enthusiasm lost their uncertain footholds and fluttered about,
seeking others. For a moment there was confusion.

"I have told them briefly what we are to do," Miela explained. "First, to
rid the Great City of Tao's men, sending them back to the Twilight
Country; and do this in all our other cities where they are making
trouble. Then, when our nation is free from this danger, we will plan how
to deal with Tao direct, for he must not again go to your earth.

"And when all that is done I have said you will do your best to make our
men believe as you do, so that never again will our women marry only to
lose all that makes their virginity so glorious."



CHAPTER XVI.


THE FIRE PLANET.


I think I should explain now a little about the physical conformation of
Mercury--the "lay of the land," so to speak--in order that the events I am
about to describe may be more readily understood. It has already been made
clear by Bob Trevor, I believe, that Mercury revolves on its axis only
once during the time of its revolution around the sun. Thus, just as a
similar condition always makes our moon present very nearly the same face
to us, so Mercury presents always the same portion of its surface to the
sun.

It will be understood, therefore, that, theoretically, there must be on
Mercury but one spot where the sun always is directly overhead. It could
not be seen, however, owing to the dense clouds. This spot approximates
the center of the region known as the Fire Country.

So far as I could learn, it was here that human life on the planet began.
Certainly it was the first region where civilization reached any height.
When Columbus was discovering America great cities flourished in the Fire
Country--cities of untold wealth and beauty, now fallen into ruins like
the great cities of our own Aztec and Inca civilizations.

The Fire Country was then like the equatorial regions of earth--a dense,
tropic jungle, hotter than most temperatures we have to bear, but still,
by reason of its thick enveloping atmosphere of clouds, capable of
supporting life in comparative comfort. Its inhabitants were dark-skinned,
but rather more like our Indians than Negroid races.

Then, several centuries ago--the exact time is uncertain, for no written
records are kept on Mercury--came the Great Storms. Their cause was
unknown--some widespread atmospheric disturbance. These storms temporarily
parted the clouds in many places, allowing the direct rays of the sun to
fall upon the planet's surface. The resulting temperature destroyed all
life, withered all vegetation, with its scorching blast. The inhabitants
of the Fire Country were killed by hundreds of thousands, their cities
deserted, their land laid a desert waste.

These storms, which it appears began suddenly, have returned periodically
ever since, making the region practically uninhabitable. Its surviving
races, pushed outward toward the more temperate zone, were living, at this
time I am describing, in a much lower state of civilization than the
people of the Light Country--a civilization of comparative savagery. In
the Light Country they were held as slaves.

This region--thus very aptly known as the Fire Country--embraces a
circular area directly underneath the sun. So far as I could learn, it
extended outward roughly to those points where--if it had been
visible--the sun would have appeared some halfway between zenith and
horizon.

Lying outside the circle, in a larger, concentric ring, is the zone known
as the Light Country. Entirely free from the equatorial storms, no direct
rays of sunlight have ever penetrated its protecting cloud blanket. Here
exists the highest state of civilization on the planet.

Beyond the Light Country, in another concentric ring, lies the Twilight
Country. It forms a belt about the planet, beginning roughly at those
points at which the sun would appear only a short distance above the
horizon, and extending back to where the sun would be below the horizon.
In this region, as its name implies, there is never more than twilight. It
is lightest at the borders of the Light Country, and fades into night at
its other side.

Still farther, beyond the twilight zone, lies the region of perpetual
night and cold--the Dark Country. This area embraces the rest of the
planet, comprising something less than half of its entire surface. Here is
eternal night--a night of Stygian darkness, unlighted even by the stars,
since the same atmosphere makes them invisible.

The Dark Country, so far as it has been explored--which is very little--is
a rocky waste and a sea of solid ice that never melts. Near the borders of
the Twilight Country a few people like our Eskimos exist--savages with
huge white faces, and great, staring eyes. There are a few fur-bearing
animals and birds, but except for this fringe of life the Dark Country is
thought to be uninhabited, its terrible cold making life in any form
impossible.

So much, in general, for the main geographical features of Mercury. The
Great City stands about halfway between the borders of the Fire Country
and the edge of the twilight zone. This level marshland, the barren,
metallic mountains, and a sort of semitropic jungle, partly inundated by
water, comprise nearly all the area of the Light Country.

From the Great City, through the watery jungle, extends a system of little
winding bayous--a perfect maze of them, with hundreds of
intercommunicating branches--which it would be almost impossible to
traverse without losing all sense of direction.

Beyond these bayous, into which their sluggish currents flow, lies the
Narrow Sea. On its farther shore begins the Twilight Country, much of it a
barren, semifrigid waste, with a little level, tillable land, vast rocky
mountain ranges, and a few forests.

In spite of its inhospitable character the Twilight Country is fairly
densely populated; and, I realized when I got into it, civilized life is
exceedingly difficult to maintain there. I understood then why the
Twilight People were so envious of land in the Light Country; and, in
truth, I could not blame them for that, or for looking toward our earth
with longing.

But just as the Light Country People had defended their borders with
implacable determination, so was I determined that they should not invade
my world, either. And I was ready to stake my life and even the lives of
those I loved here on Mercury in the attempt to prevent them.



CHAPTER XVII.


THE FIGHT AT THE BAYOU.


Miela proceeded to explain our plan in detail to these fifteen hundred
enthusiastic allies. It was my idea to build several platforms similar to
this one on which Mercer and I had been carried up here into the
mountains, only somewhat larger. We then proposed to seize these
emissaries of Tao--there were not more than eight or ten of them
altogether in the Great City--capturing them at night, without alarm, if
possible, and transporting them summarily into the Twilight Country. My
theory was that if they were to disappear thus mysteriously the people of
the Great City would have no particular cause to make trouble afterward,
and we hoped that the affair would soon be forgotten.

Miela thought it practical for us to carry them in this way across the
Narrow Sea. The Lone City, from which Tao was operating, was located near
the edge of the sea, and if we gave them food they would be enabled to
reach it in safety in a day or two. The girls agreed enthusiastically with
this plan, and we selected a number to carry it out.

Meanwhile we planned also to organize a system of arial patrols, and
detailed some two hundred of the girls, who in varying shifts were to fly
back and forth along the borders of the sea over its Light Country shore,
to make sure that Tao did not attempt to make a crossing by water.

"Can't they fly over as well as we can?" Mercer objected. "Their women
fly, too, don't they?"

The women of the Twilight Country did fly, but for two reasons we did not
fear an attack from them in the air. First, Miela doubted that the women
would concern themselves in the affair; they were stupid and
apathetic--fit only for child-bearing. The men might, of course, force
them to the attempt, but even in that event, Miela explained, it would
result in little; for generations of comparative inactivity and the colder
climate had made them inclined to stoutness. Their wing muscles were weak
and flabby, and with their greater weight of body they flew very badly.

"Suppose Tao should come over?" I suggested to Miela. "I don't believe he
will--but if he should, how could we stop him?"

"By water he would come," she answered. "In boats--small they are, I
think, those he has. We could not stop him, for the light-ray he would
bring. But our women, flying over the ocean, would see him coming, and
tell our king. More we could not do now."

"You mean this patrol would give the government the warning it won't
obtain for itself? There would be war then? The people would arm to resist
invasion?"

Miela smiled sadly.

"There would be war, Alan. But our government--our people--do not look for
it. They are like the peeta bird, that hides its head under its wing when
it is threatened."

The time of sleep was now nearly over, and we thought it best that the
girls should fly back at once, so that their arrival at the city would
cause as little comment as possible.

Mercer and I seated ourselves on the platform as before; the twenty girls
grasped its handles, raising it until they were all upon their feet; then,
at a signal, we left the ground. The trip back seemed shorter than coming
up. The girls all left the valley together, flying up helter-skelter, and
circling about us as we flew steadily onward.

Near the Great City the girls spread out, so as to approach it from
different directions and thus attract less attention, although the time of
sleep was not yet over and we knew that few would be stirring about the
city.

When we reached home we greeted Lua, and dismissed the girls, arranging
that they were to come back again that evening--fifty of them this
time--to carry the larger platform we were to build. We then had
breakfast, and after telling Lua the result of the meeting--at which she
was greatly pleased--we went immediately to bed, for we were worn out.

It was about noon, I suppose, when we awoke. Mercer and I spent the
afternoon building the platform on which to carry Tao's men--a framework
with fifty handles instead of twenty. Miela and Anina disappeared for the
whole afternoon. I did not know what they were doing at the time; later I
found out Anina was devoting it to learning English.

During the evening meal we planned it all. Tao's men were living in a
house near the edge of the city--the house Tao had occupied before he was
banished to the Twilight Country. It had no other occupants at this time.

We had learned where they kept their boats in one of the bayous near by,
and in it we intended to take them to the sea, where we would meet the
girls, who would then fly with them to the Twilight Country. But we could
not figure out how to capture them without alarming the city. We were sure
they were unarmed; they had been carefully searched by the authorities
when they entered the country. But they were ten to our two.

Mercer voiced the problem most emphatically.

"Ten men in a house," he declared. "Maybe we can catch them all asleep.
But even if they are, how are we going to get them out? There'd be a row,
and we don't want any noise. Besides, there's always this confounded
daylight here. If we tied them up somebody might see us when we got
outside. How do we get them out of that house without any rumpus, and down
to that boat? That's what I don't see."

"I--do--that," said Anina suddenly.

She had spoken in English, and we looked at her in amazement. She lisped
the words in her soft, sweet voice, haltingly, like a little child. Then
she turned to Miela and poured out a torrent of her native language.
Mercer stared at her in undisguised admiration.

As Miela explained it, Anina proposed that she go into Tao's house alone,
and decoy his men down to the boat where we could capture them.

"But how will she get them there?" I exclaimed. "What will she tell them?"

"She says she can make them think she is one of those few of our women who
sympathize with their cause," Miela explained. "And she will say that the
earth-man who escaped from them she has seen lurking about their boat;
perhaps he plans to steal it. She will go there with them, and they can
recapture him."

"They might not all go," said Mercer. "We want to get them all."

"It is Anina's thought that they will all go, for they fear this earth-man
much--and all would go to make sure of him."

I could not feel it was right for us to let Anina do so daring a thing,
and Mercer agreed with me heartily. But Anina insisted, with a fire in her
eyes and flushed cheeks that contrasted strangely with her usually gentle
demeanor.

In the end Mercer and I gave in, for we could think of no better plan, and
Miela was confident Anina would not be harmed.

It was about what would correspond with ten o'clock in the evening on
earth when the girls began to arrive. We waited until all fifty of them
had come in. Miela named a place on the shore of the sea known to them
all. They were to take the platform--starting in about two hours, when the
city would be quiet--and there they would wait for us to join them in the
boat.

We four started out together, but soon Anina left us to make her way to
Tao's house alone. Mercer, Miela and I then hurried as fast as we could
through the city down to the marshlands, and to the secluded spot on the
bayou's bank where the boat was lying.

The bayou here was about a hundred feet wide, a winding, brackish stream,
lined on both sides with trees whose roots were in the water and whose
branches at times nearly met overhead. Its banks were a tangled mass of
tree roots, huge ferns, palmettos and some tall upstanding kind of water
grass. Half submerged logs jutted out into the sluggish current, making it
in places seem almost impassable.

A narrow metal boat--a very long and very narrow motor boat with a
thatched shelter like a small cabin over part of its length--lay fastened
to a tree near at hand. I noticed at once some mechanism over its stern.

We had come up quietly to make sure no one was about. Now we hid ourselves
close to the boat and waited with apprehension in our hearts for the
arrival of Anina with Tao's men.

Half an hour, perhaps, went by. The silence in this secluded spot hung
heavy about us. A fish broke the glassy surface of the water; a lizard
scurried along the ground; a bird flitted past. Then, setting our hearts
pounding, came the soft snapping of underbrush that we knew was the
cautious tread of some one approaching. I was half reclining under a
fallen tree, with a clump of palmettos about me. I parted their fronds
carefully before my face. A few yards away a man was standing motionless,
staring past me and apparently listening intently.

He moved forward after a moment. I feared he was coming almost upon us,
but he turned aside, bending low down as he crept slowly forward. Sounds
in the underbrush reached me now from other directions, and I knew that
the men had spread apart and were stalking the boat, expecting Mercer to
be in or near it.

Had they all come down here? I wondered. And where was Anina? I looked
down at Miela warningly as I felt her move slightly.

"We'll wait till they're all near the boat," I whispered to Mercer.

I saw Anina a moment later soaring over the bayou just above the treetops.
I sighed with relief, for it was a signal to us that everything was all
right. We continued to wait until the men had all come into view. They
went at the boat with a sudden rush. Several of them climbed into it, with
shouts to the others.

With a significant glance to Mercer I leaped suddenly to my feet. I was
perhaps twenty feet from the boat, and the space between us was fairly
clear. A single bound landed me beside it, almost among four of the men
who were standing there in a group. Before they had time to face me I was
upon them.

I scattered them like nine-pins, and two of them went down under my blows.
The other two flung themselves upon me. I stumbled over some inequality of
the ground, and we all three fell prone. This was the first time I had
come actually to hand grips with any of the Mercutians.

I felt now not only their lack of strength, but a curious frailness about
their bodies--a seeming absence of solidity that their stocky appearance
belied. These two men were like half-grown boys in my hands. I was back on
my feet in a moment, leaving one of them lying motionless. The other rose
to his knees, his face white with pain and terror.

I left him there and looked about me. Miela was fluttering around near by,
as I had instructed her--just off the ground and with the whole scene
under her eyes. It was she on whom I depended for warning should any of
the quarry attempt to escape us.

At the edge of the water another man was lying, whom I assumed Mercer had
felled. There was a great commotion from the boat. I ran toward it. A man
was standing beside it--an old man with snow-white hair. He stood still,
seeming confused and in doubt what to do. As I neared him he turned
clumsily to avoid me. I passed him by and bounded over the boat's gunwale,
landing in its bottom. The first thing I saw was Mercer struggling to his
feet with four of the Mercutians hanging on him. One had a grip on his
throat from behind; another clutched him about the knees.

The two others let go of him when they heard me land in the boat. One had
evidently had enough, for he dived overboard. The other waited warily for
my onslaught. As I got within reach I hit at his face, but my blow went
wild. He hit me full in the chest, but it was the blow of a child.

At that instant I heard Mercer give a choking cry, and out of the corner
of my eye saw him go down again. I could waste no more time upon this
single antagonist. The man had his hands at my throat now. I seized him
about the waist and carried him to the gunwale. He clung to me as a rat
might cling to a terrier, but I shook him off and dumped him in the water.

I turned to Mercer just as he was struggling to his feet again, and in a
moment more between us we had felled his two assailants. Mercer's face was
very white, and I saw blood streaming from a wound on his head; but he
grinned as he faced me.

"Have we--got 'em--all?" he gasped. He dashed the blood away from his eyes
with the flat of his hand. "I fell--damn it--right at the start, and hit
my head. Where are they all? Have we got 'em?"

Miela alighted in the boat beside us.

"Two are running," she said. "They are together. Hasten."

We jumped out of the boat. Miela flew up, and we followed her guidance
through the dense woods. We could make much better speed, I knew, than the
Mercutians. "We'll get them all, Ollie," I shouted at Mercer. "They're not
far ahead. See up there--Miela's evidently over them now."

We came up to them after a few hundred yards. It was the old man, and one
of those whom I had first encountered. They did not wait for us to attack
them, but stopped stock still, flinging their arms wide in token of
surrender.

Miela came down among us, and we went back to where we had lain hidden in
the palmettos. There we had left a number of short lengths of rope. While
we were tying the arms of these two prisoners behind them and fettering
their ankles so they could not run Anina joined us.

"Two--in water," she cried; and then added something to Miela.

"Two were in the water. Now they are in the woods, running. Anina will
show you."

Miela stood guard in the boat over our first two prisoners, while Mercer
and I rounded up the others. It was half an hour or more before we had
them all trussed up, but none of the ten escaped. We were a long time
reviving two of those we had injured, but finally we had them all lying or
sitting in the boat.

Mercer's head had stopped bleeding. He washed it, and I found his injury
no more than an ugly scalp wound.

"I fell and cut it on something," he explained lugubriously. "Couldn't see
for the blood in my eyes. But we got 'em, didn't we?"

Under Miela's direction Mercer and I shoved the boat out into the stream.
I need not go into details regarding the propelling mechanism of this
craft. Miela explained it hastily to me as we got under way. It used a
form of the light-ray from a sort of strange battery. The intense heat of
the ray generated a great pressure of superheated steam in a thick metal
cylinder underneath the keel.

This steam escaped through a nozzle under water at the stern of the boat,
and its thrust against the water propelled the boat forward. The boat was
constructed to draw very little water, and when going fast its bow planed
upward until only the stern of the hull touched the surface. It was
steered by a rudder not much different from some of those types we are
familiar with on earth. When we got out into open water I found the boat
was capable of great speed. This I attributed not so much to the efficacy
of its propelling force as to the lightness of the boat itself. It was
built of some metal that I may perhaps compare with aluminium, only this
was far stronger and lighter. The boat was, in fact, a mere shell,
extraordinarily buoyant.

Miela sat in the stern, steering and operating the mechanism. I sat with
her. Mercer was farther forward, beside Anina, talking to her earnestly.
Our prisoners lay huddled in various attitudes--frightened, all of them,
and obviously in no condition to give us further trouble. They were, I saw
now, not ruffians by any means, but rather men of superior intelligence,
selected by Tao evidently as those best fitted for spreading his
propaganda among the people of the Great City.

We made slow progress down the bayou. Some of its turns were so sharp and
so overhung with trees, and obstructed by fallen logs, we could hardly get
through. During the latter part of the trip the bayou broadened rapidly,
dividing into many channels like a delta.

We came out into the open sea finally--a broad, empty expanse, with a
mirrorlike surface. The curvature of the planet was even more apparent
now; it seemed almost as though the water should be sliding back downhill
over the horizon.

We turned to the left as we came out of the delta, and for the first time
Miela put the boat to the limit of its speed. The best comparison I can
make, I think, to this rapid, noiseless, smooth progress, is that of
sailing on an iceboat.

We sped along some five or ten miles, keeping close inland. I saw some of
the small thatched shacks along here, though not many. For a while the
shore remained that same palm-lined, half-inundated marshland. Then
gradually it began to change, and we came upon a broad beach of white
sand.

We landed here, and found the girls with the platform waiting for us.
Miela took Anina and one or two of the older girls aside, and gave them
last instructions.

"What do I do--just dump them on the other shore?" Mercer asked me.

"That's about it. I don't know the lay of the land over there. Anina does.
You do what she tells you."

"You bet I will," he agreed enthusiastically. "Some kid--that little girl.
We get along fine. She understands everything I say to her already. I'll
have her talking English like a streak by the time you see her again."

We had removed the cords from our prisoners' ankles. I motioned them to
get out of the boat. We crowded Tao's men on the platform. They were
surprised, and some of them alarmed, when they saw how we proposed to
transport them over the water. Miela silenced their protests, and soon we
had them all seated on the platform, with Mercer at the rear end facing
them.

The fifty girls grasped the platform handles. Another moment and they were
in the air, with Mercer waving good-by to us vigorously.

Miela and I, left alone, watched them silently as they dwindled to a speck
in the haze of the sky.

We were about to start back when we saw a girl coming toward us, flying
low over the water. One of those we had directed to patrol the coast,
Miela said when she came closer. She saw us, and came down on the beach.

The two girls spoke together hurriedly.

"Tao's men in the Water City have caused great disturbance, Alan," Miela
said to me.

"Where's the Water City?"

"Near the Great City--across the marshlands. We must get back. And when
Anina and our friend Ollie have returned we must go to the Water City. It
is very bad there, she said."

Our trip back to the Great City was without unusual incident. We followed
the main route at the best speed we could make.

"We shall tell our king, of course, about this disturbance," said Miela.
"Perhaps he will think there is something he can do. But I fear greatly
that unless he appeals directly to the people, and they are with him--"

"He's an old man," I said, "and all his councilors are old. They're not
fit to rule at such a time as this. Suppose he were to die--what would
happen? Who would be king then?"

"A little prince there is--a mere child. And there is our queen--a younger
woman, only married to our king these few years. His first queen died."

I questioned Miela concerning her government. It was, I soon learned, an
autocracy in theory. But of later years the king's advanced age, and his
equally old councilors whom he refused to change, had resulted in a
vacillating policy of administration, which now, I could see plainly, left
the government little or no real power.

Only by constantly pandering to the wishes of the people could the king
hold his throne. The supreme command was held by the king and his aged
councilors. At stated intervals the more prominent men of each city met
and enacted laws. The cities were each ruled by a governor in similar
fashion, paying tribute to the central government somewhat after our old
feudal system; but for practical purposes they acted as separate nations.
They were united merely by the bonds of their common need of defense
against the Twilight People, and of intermarriage, which was frequent,
since the virgins, flying about, often found mates in cities other than
their own.

There were courts in each city, not much more than rude tribunals, and
jails in which the offenders were held. The police I have already
mentioned. They, like the king's guards, were inclined in an emergency to
do, not so much what they were ordered, as what they thought the people
wished.

It was all very extraordinary, but like many another makeshift government
it served, after a fashion.

Hiding the boat in another bayou, we took our way home on foot. That is to
say, I ran, and Miela followed me, alternately flying and walking. We made
our best speed this way, and very soon were back at home in the Great
City.

We crossed the garden and entered the front door, expecting to find Lua in
the living room, but she was not there. The house was quiet.

"She would wait up, she told me," Miela said, and, raising her voice,
called her mother's name.

There was no answer, although now I remember I thought I heard a footfall
upstairs.

We went up to Lua's room hurriedly. It was empty, and our loud cries of
anxiety throughout the house evoked no response. We entered our own
bedroom, and before I could make a move to defend myself I was seized
tightly by both elbows from behind.

At the same instant an arm hooked around my neck under my chin and jerked
my head backward, and another pair of arms clutched me around the knees. I
struggled vainly to free myself, shouting to Miela to run.

But there were too many holding me. A moment more and my arms were tied
behind me and a rope was about my legs. I was pushed into a chair, and as
I sat down I saw Miela standing quietly near by, with two Mercutians
holding her by the arms and shoulders.

The man who had pushed me to the seat bent down and struck me across the
cheek with the flat of his hand. His grinning, malevolent face was only a
few inches from mine. I saw that it was Baar!



CHAPTER XVIII.


REVOLUTION.


There seemed to be five of our captors, all of them as evil-looking men as
I think I have ever seen. They rummaged about the room, evidently in
search for weapons they thought I might have secreted. Then they ordered
me to stand up, and without more ado led Miela and me from the house.

This was once when I was glad of the interminable daylight. I hoped we
might find some early risers about the streets, for I thought certainly
the time of sleep must now be nearly over. But no one was in sight as we
left the garden. We turned the first corner and headed toward the base of
the mountain.

"To Baar's house they are taking us, I think. It is on the marshland
below." Miela spoke without fear of our captors understanding the English
words. We took advantage of this until after a moment we were roughly
ordered to be quiet.

Lua, we thought, must have been taken away before we arrived; we would
find her at Baar's house when we arrived there. We had come down to the
level marshlands now, the outskirts of the city, and were passing along a
path between occasional shacks. Before us, standing alone in a rice paddy,
I saw a larger, more pretentious house--a wooden structure on stilts, with
a thatched roof, which Miela said was where Baar lived.

We went in single file up its board incline, and entered a squalid room
with matting on the floor, a rude charcoal brazier at one side, and the
remains of a previous meal lying on a table.

Two women were in the room as we entered. I took these to be Baar's wife
and a servant. Two naked little children lay on the floor, one of them
crying lustily.

Baar glanced around as he came in, and with what I took to be an oath
ordered the children removed from the room. The slave woman--I could see
she was a slave by the band upon her arm--picked them up. Evidently she
did not move fast enough to suit Baar's temper, for as she straightened up
the man cuffed her upon the head. She stumbled to one side against Baar's
wife, who was standing there, and the other woman, with a sharp
imprecation, struck her full in the breast.

Neither of them saw the look she gave as she shuffled away, carrying the
infants; but I did. It was a look of the most intense hatred, born and
nourished, I realized, by long ill-treatment.

Miela and I were now bound securely hand and foot, and Miela's wings were
lashed to her body. Thus rendered entirely helpless, we were laid together
in a corner.

From the talk that followed Miela gathered that Baar and his men were
expecting the arrival of others. He roughly ordered his wife--a woman of
the Twilight Country, obviously--to clear away the remains of their last
meal and bring other food. She obeyed submissively.

This, the first of the Twilight Country People I had seen, was a thick-set
woman of perhaps thirty-five, although she might have been older, for her
black hair, which fell in an unkempt mass to her waist, was beginning to
gray. She wore a single garment, a pair of silken trousers, drab with
dirt. Her clipped wings were covered in the usual way.

I could see now why Miela had said these Twilight women could not fly, for
this woman's torso was fat and flabby. Her skin was curiously pale--a
dead, unpleasant white. Her face was broad, heavy and unintelligent. Her
eyes were large and protruded slightly.

Baar and his men ate breakfast, paying no further attention to Miela and
me. Suddenly Miela spoke in a frightened whisper. "They are going now in a
moment to the castle. The king they will kill!"

It was evidently a widespread plot we now overheard. Baar's followers had
for some time been talking quietly with the lower classes, and, finding
they could count on their support, planned now to murder the king. Then
with the queen and the little prince held as hostages, they expected that
the men of science, threatened also with a revolt of the peons, would
release the light-ray.

The light-ray once in his control, Baar could make himself king. It seemed
an absurd hope, but such was the plan they were now discussing. And what
was far worse, I could see no way by which I could prevent the attempt.

"They are going to the castle--now--to murder the king?" I whispered,
incredulous.

"Yes," Miela answered. "So they plan. Now--in a moment--before the time of
sleep is over."

"Isn't he guarded? Can they get in the castle without arousing others?"

"There are the guards--a few. But Baar has promised them great wealth, and
they will stand aside and let him pass. So it is arranged."

The arrival of several other men interrupted our whispered conversation.
Baar, his meal over, consulted with them hurriedly. He then instructed his
wife to watch us, and after a moment they all left the house.

The woman, who was now the only occupant of the room with us, shuffled
about, clearing away the meal. I tried desperately to work my hands loose;
I even tried with my teeth to gnaw Miela's bonds, but without success.
Every moment counted, if we were to do anything to save the king. I
wondered again where Lua was--perhaps in another part of the house here,
bound as we were.

"Miela," I whispered, "ask for food. Tell her we have had nothing for many
hours. Perhaps she will loosen our bonds a little to let us eat. We may be
able to do something then."

The woman answered Miela's pleading by setting us up side by side, with
our backs against the wall. She placed food before us, and then, with a
knife, cut the cords that bound our arms.

My heart leaped exultantly; but, instead of leaving us and going on with
her work, she sat down just out of reach, holding the knife in her hand
and watching us narrowly.

"We must eat, Miela," I said, using as casual a tone as I could and
pointing to the food smilingly. "Eat, and pretend not to notice her.
Perhaps I can get to my feet."

We ate the food she had given us. I tensed the muscles of my legs, and
believed that, bound as I was, I might be able to leap forward and reach
the woman. It was almost hopeless to attempt it, for I realized she would
meet my body with the dagger point.

We were still eating, and I was thinking over this plan, when the slave
woman appeared silently in a doorway across the room, behind the woman who
faced us. Something in her attitude made me look away again casually and
go on with my eating.

Miela had evidently not noticed her.

The slave woman came slowly toward us. A moment later she hurled herself
upon Baar's wife from behind. At the same instant I threw myself forward,
falling prone, but within reach of the seated woman. I gripped her with my
hands, fumbling to catch her wrists, but before I could succeed she
toppled forward and fell partly over me.

I heard Miela give a cry of fright. I struggled free and raised myself up
to a half-sitting position. Baar's wife lay beside me dead, with the slave
woman's knife buried to the hilt in her back.

Reaching over, I took the knife from the dead woman's fingers, and with it
cut the cords that bound my ankles. I sprang to my feet. The slave had
retreated and stood shrinking against the side of the room, terrified at
what she had done. I paid no more attention to her for the moment, but
hastened to release Miela.

We searched the house hurriedly, calling to Lua; but she did not answer,
nor could we find her. When we returned the slave woman was still standing
where we had left her, staring with horrified eyes at the body of her
mistress.

"Tell her what she did was right," I said. "She may have saved the king.
Tell her to go to your house and wait for us."

The woman nodded eagerly when Miela told her what to do, and fell on her
knees before us.

"She says she will serve us always. She has been very badly treated,
Alan."

We sent the woman away, and with a last hasty glance around hurriedly left
the house alone with its single dead occupant. A large wooden mortar and
pestle, used for pounding rice, stood in the kitchen. I carried the pestle
away with me; it was nearly five feet long and quite heavy--an excellent
weapon.

We hastened up through the city--Miela half walking, half flying, and I
carrying this bludgeon and running with twelve-foot strides. But it was
now hardly more than three-quarters of an hour since we had passed this
way before, and there were still few people about to see us. Baar and his
men had started some twenty minutes before us, I figured, and we must
reach the castle before them.

I made extraordinary progress over the level country. But I could not run
uphill for long, and soon had to slow down to a walk. Miela kept closer to
me now. We approached the castle grounds.

"Where will the guards be, Miela? We must avoid them if we can. They might
try to stop us."

Miela did not know where they would be; but under the circumstances, as
Baar had told his men, she believed the guards would disappear from the
vicinity. This conjecture proved to be correct. The guards, not wishing to
be concerned in the affair at all, had simply disappeared. We saw nothing
of Baar and his men on the way up the mountain, although I had hoped we
might overtake them.

As we passed hurriedly through the palm gardens surrounding the castle I
saw its huge front doors were closed.

"Miela, we can't get in that way. A side entrance--or some other way--"

"I know," she said. "There is a smaller door below, and others on the
side."

We hastened on. Suddenly I gripped Miela by the arm.

"What's that--over there--see, beyond the grove?"

There seemed to be furtive figures lurking among the palms.

"Those cannot be Baar's men, Miela--there are too many. What can it--"

We had reached a little doorway under the front terrace. There was no time
to investigate these advancing figures. Baar and his men might already be
inside the castle.

I slid through the doorway, every muscle tense. Miela had brought the
knife from Baar's shack, and with it clenched in her hand was close beside
me. I wanted to make her stay outside, where she could fly away if danger
threatened, but she pleaded to follow me, and I let her come. I needed
her, since I had no idea of the interior arrangements of the building.

We passed along a dim hallway and up a narrow flight of stone steps. Not a
sound came to us; the interior of the castle was silent as a tomb. At the
top of the steps we came almost directly into the inner patio of the
building. Across a bed of tall flowers, nodding gently in a little morning
breeze that swept down from above, I saw the head and shoulders of a man
standing in the center of the courtyard; the lower part of his body was
hidden by the flowers. I tried to duck out of sight, but he had seen me.

He was not over forty feet away. I stepped back, believing I could reach
him in a single leap; but Miela held me.

"Not you, Alan. He would cry out. The noise would bring others." She
raised her knife, and her eyes blazed into mine. "Never have I thought to
kill a human. But now I--a woman--must kill. Stand quiet, Alan."

She flew swiftly up and poised over the man. He had started toward us.
Evidently he was, so far, as anxious for silence as we, for he made no
sound. I saw now he was one of those who had come to Baar's shack. His
naked shoulders, his thick neck, and bullet head were all that showed
above the flower stems as he plowed his way through them directly toward
me; but the hand he swung aloft to aid his progress held a knife.

He glanced up at Miela, poised in the air above him, and saw the weapon in
her hand. At this new enemy he stopped, confused.

Miela swooped down at him, and he struck at her with his knife; but she
avoided it with an incredibly swift turn, and a second later had passed
him and was crossing the courtyard.

Round and round she flew, her great wings flapping audibly, a giant bird
circling its prey. The man turned continually to face her. Several times
she swooped toward him, and as swiftly avoided his blow. From every side
she threatened. The man stood now bewildered, striking wild in a frenzy,
as one strikes at a darting wasp. At last, with an agonized cry, he turned
and ran. Instantly she dropped upon him; there was a flash of her white
arm; the man's body crumpled and lay still among the flowers.

Miela was back beside me. Her breast was heaving; her eyes were full of
tears; she trembled.

"A terrible thing, Alan, my husband, for a woman to do; but it had to be."

I pressed her hand with silent understanding.

"Come, Alan," she said. "They will have heard his cry. The others--we must
meet them, too."

"We must get to the king. I--"

A vibrant scream rang out from the silence of the house--a man's voice,
shrill with agony--then suddenly stilled.

"Good God, Miela! The king--where is he? Take me there."

She pulled me back through the doorway. A man scurried past. I leaped at
him and struck him a glancing blow with the heavy wooden pestle. He
stumbled to his knees. Without thought of giving quarter, I hit him again
before he could rise. He sank back, senseless or dead.

Miela was ahead of me, and I ran after her along a hallway. The sound of
scurrying footsteps sounded from overhead; a woman screamed.

A broad, curving stairway fronted us. I passed Miela halfway up, and,
reaching the top, ran full into another man who darted from a doorway
close by. The impact of my heavier body flung him backward to the floor. I
leaped over him with a shout of warning to Miela, and ran on into the
room.

A man was standing stock still in its center. It was Baar. He flung his
knife at me as I appeared, but it went wild. Two other men were coming
toward me from opposite sides of the room. I swung the bludgeon about me
viciously, keeping them away. Suddenly Baar shouted a command, and before
I could reach any one of them they had scurried away like rats.

A low bed with a huge canopy of silk stood against the wall. A woman knelt
on the floor beside it, and against her knees huddled a little half-grown
boy.

I heard Miela's voice shouting in her own language. The sound of men
running came from below. Then Miela's half-hysterical laughter, and then
the words: "They are running away, Alan--all of them. I have been calling
you to bring me the light-ray. And they are running away."

I turned to the bed, pushing its curtains aside, and then hurriedly
closing them again with a shudder.

Miela was beside me.

"The king is dead, Miela. No--you must not look."

Her eyes widened; her hand went to her breast.

"There is one who needs you." I pointed to the woman on the floor.

She was staring at us, unseeing, one arm flung about the child
protectingly, holding him partially under one of her long, sleek red
wings. The fingers of her other hand clutched convulsively at the bed
coverings; she was moaning softly with a grief and terror all the more
intense because it was restrained.

"There is one who needs you, Miela," I repeated. "Comfort her--for we have
come too late."

The castle now was in thorough confusion. Several waiting maids rushed
into the room, stared at their mistress and the little prince, and, seeing
what had happened, stood silently wringing their hands in fright, or fled
aimlessly through the halls. One of the king's councilors had come in,
stopping, bewildered, at the scene that met him.

"Tell him what has occurred, Miela," I said.

There came now faintly to my ears from outside the castle sounds of a
gathering crowd--murmurs and vague muffled shouts. The cries grew louder.
A rain of missiles struck the castle; a stone came through a near-by
window, falling almost at my feet. All at once I remembered the lurking
figures we had seen among the palms in the garden.

"Miela!" I cried. "Hear that, outside! A crowd is gathering. The men we
saw--out there! People whom Baar has--Miela, ask him, for God's sake, to
tell us how we can get weapons. Where are the other councilors? Send for
them. We must do something--now, at once. This is revolution, Miela--don't
you understand? Revolution!"

I felt so impotent. Here in this crisis I could talk to no one but
Miela--could issue no direct commands--could understand the words of no
one but her.

Suddenly, from over our heads, a great, solemn deep-throated bell began
tolling.

"What is that? What does that mean?"

A girl rushed into the room.

"It is the bell of danger," said Miela quickly. "The girls are ringing it
to arouse the city. Up here then will the people hurry to find out what it
is that threatens."

"They're outside now," I retorted. "Order all the king's councilors here
at once. Find out if any guards are about the place. Send them here. Where
is the head of the city's police? Send him here to me! Tell him to call
out all his men."

What was I saying? I had forgotten the one vital thing!

"Miela! The light-ray! These men of science who guard it, where are they?
Send for their leader. Get him here to me at once--we must have the ray!"

Miela stood very quietly beside me. Her face was white; her eyes blazed,
but she seemed calm and unfrightened.

"He will come," she said, "and armed with the ray. The bell will bring
him. Your other commands I will see are obeyed."

The old councilor, who had been standing by, dazed, came slowly forward at
Miela's call. The king's councilor! And all the others were like him. The
king was dead, and here was the little prince huddled in his mother's arm!
Realization had been slow in coming, but now it broke upon me like a great
light.

I flung the bludgeon away from me, and stood erect.

"Miela," I cried, "tell him--tell them all--their king is dead. It is _I_
who command now. There is no one else--and I have the power. Tell them
that. It is I, the man from earth, who commands!"



CHAPTER XIX.


THE NEW RULER.


The solemn bell continued pealing out its knell; the shouts and tumult
outside were growing louder. Miela spoke hurriedly to the old man, then
turned to leave the room.

"Your commands shall be obeyed, my husband," she said quietly.

I felt again that sudden sense of helplessness as I saw her leave.

"Be careful, Miela. Order every one in the castle to the roof. Here! Tell
the queen before you go. Send every one up there with me. The mob may come
in. We'll make our stand up there."

I understood Baar's plot better now. He had gathered his mob of peons to
surround the castle and make a demonstration in his favor. Then, with the
king dead and the queen and her little son held by him and his men--their
lives as forfeits--he hoped to be able to treat with the men of science
who controlled the light-ray, and who, I did not doubt, represented the
better element among the people.

It seemed a mad plan at best; and now that it had gone wrong, I wondered
what Baar would attempt to do. Evidently he and his henchmen had all left
the castle, fearing the light-ray, which Miela pretended I held. They were
outside now, among the mob, I assumed. Would the mob attempt to enter?

Miela hurried away to send every one inside the building to its roof. The
queen, following Miela's commands unquestioningly, took the little prince
by the hand and, signing to me to follow, led me upstairs.

There was only one stairway leading to the roof, I found with
satisfaction, and it was narrow--an excellent place for defense. The roof
was broad and flat, flanked at the ends by two towers which rose
considerably above it.

It was a frightened little group who gathered about me--the queen and her
son, two of the king's councilors, and perhaps half a dozen young girls
whom I took to be the queen's attendants. Others came up each moment.

I sat the queen down on a little white stone bench in the center of the
garden, and bowed before her respectfully. Then I smiled upon them all. I
think they were reassured and trusted me, and I found my commands were
obeyed without question.

The queen was a woman of perhaps thirty-five--tall and slender, with black
hair and eyes. She was dressed in a single garment of heavy white silk, a
dress that fell ungathered at the waist from above her breast under the
arms to her ankles. It was, I judged, her sleeping robe. Her hair hung in
two long braids over her shoulders; her feet were incased in sandals.

She was unquestionably a beautiful woman. I remember my vague surprise, as
I saw her, with her son by her side, and her long sleek wings unmutilated.
And then I saw that her wings were fastened together in two places by
little metal chains. She, then, like other married women, was not
permitted to fly, although the beauty of her wings was unspoiled.

I sent two of the old men to stand by the head of the stairs. Miela had
given me her knife, and I handed it now to one of them, trying to make him
understand that he was to bar the passage of any one who should not be
allowed up. He shuddered, but he took the knife and stood where I
indicated.

The crowd in the garden below had seen us on the roof now, and the tumult
of shouts was doubled. I went to the parapet and looked over.

The garden was full of a struggling, confused mass of people. Those
nearest the castle were mostly peons. I noticed men and a few women armed
with various implements of agriculture, and any sort of rude weapon they
could obtain. They were standing about in little groups or rushing
excitedly to and fro in aimless, uncommanded activity.

Many of them held stones in their hands, which occasionally they cast at
the building. It was one of those mobs that gather ready for trouble, is
swayed in almost any direction by any chance leadership, and most
frequently accomplishes nothing.

I felt a sudden sense of relief. The garden was rapidly filling up with
men and women of the more intelligent classes, who mingled with the
others, learned what had occurred--for I did not doubt but that the
knowledge of the king's death had spread about--and then stood waiting to
see what would happen.

The air was full of excited girls flying over the castle. A few alighted
for a moment on the roof, but I did not fear them. Where was Baar? I could
not hope to distinguish him among the crowd, but still I saw no sign of
his leadership. Had he seen the failure of his plan and, fearing the
results of his regicide, fled the vicinity? I hoped so fervently.

As I showed myself at the parapet a great shout arose. Some of the men--I
knew at once it was those who had heard I possessed the
light-ray--scattered in terror at my appearance. I determined then, if no
issue were raised that would demand my using this supposed weapon, I could
continue to command the situation.

I stood there a moment looking down. At the edge of the crowd I saw a few
figures whom I took to be members of the city's police. They were standing
idle, taking no part in what was going on. There seemed nothing I could do
until Miela returned. If only I could speak to the crowd! I wondered if I
dared descend among them and disperse the mob of peons. I went to the head
of the stairway. Three or four of the king's councilors were standing
there.

There was no one on the stairs; evidently every one living in the castle
was now on its roof--some thirty of them altogether. The crowd outside
quite evidently had no present intention of entering the building. The mob
of peons Baar had gathered were greatly in the minority now, and I felt
that matters were steadily improving. I wondered where Miela was, and then
while I was standing there I saw her coming up the stairs, a man following
close behind her.

I think I have never been so glad to see any one as I was to see her at
this moment. Her face was grave; her demeanor calm, as before.

"He is here," she said as she came to the head of the stairs. "This is
Fuero, Alan, leader of the men of science, who have the ray."

As he came out onto the roof I saw this man was easily the most dominant
personality I had so far encountered on Mercury. He was tall for his race,
although several inches shorter than I, a man of sixty, perhaps, with
iron-gray hair falling long about his ears.

He wore sandals and a pair of the usual knee-length, wide-cut trousers.
But what distinguished him in his dress was a broad panel of heavy silk,
hanging from neck to knee, both in back and front, with an opening at the
top through which his head was thrust. This silken panel was some eighteen
inches wide, light gray in color, and richly embroidered in gold in
various designs. It hung free, except for a slight fastening at the waist
line. Beneath it the man's naked torso--and his bare arms--showed
powerfully muscled.

His face was smooth shaven, with strong, regular features. I noticed, too,
there was a slight cleft in his square chin. His forehead was high, his
blue eyes kindly, yet with a searching, piercing quality about them.

It was not so much the man's general appearance as his bearing that made
me realize he was a forceful character. There was about him unmistakable
poise. I knew at once he felt his power, his authority. That he would use
it wisely I could not doubt.

He stood regarding me gravely--an appraising regard under which I felt
myself flushing a little. Miela spoke to him swiftly, and he inclined his
head to me by way of introduction, his glance meanwhile taking in the
scene on the roof.

With Miela as interpreter we held a hurried conversation. I learned then
that Fuero and his associates had many years before organized a society
for the development of the light-ray in its various forms. They had soon
realized in their experiments its diabolical power of destruction, and had
taken oath then that they would not use it, or allow it to be used, except
under the most critical circumstances of the nation's welfare.

Realizing, too, the power it gave them as individuals, they had sworn to
remain men of science only, taking no part in public affairs, remaining
rigidly aloof from all national affairs. Most of their work concerned the
development of the light-ray for industrial purposes. In these forms it
developed heat, but had very little power of projection.

All this Miela told me in a few brief sentences.

"How did Tao get the ray?" I demanded.

"Some members of the society proved false," she answered. "When Tao was
banished to the Twilight Country they deserted their brothers and joined
him. There were others with him of scientific mind, and these soon learned
how to make it, too."

Fuero was still regarding me appraisingly. I felt suddenly very young,
very inadequate as I stood there facing him. But I met his gaze squarely,
and all at once he smiled.

"He says, 'Let us speak to the people,'" said Miela.

We went to the parapet. Only a few moments had elapsed since I had stood
there before. The situation below was unchanged, except that the crowd had
grown denser.

A sudden hush fell as they saw us. Fuero turned to me and spoke quietly;
his eyes seemed searching out my thoughts.

"He asks you, my husband, if you will take oath before your God to do what
is right for our people. He wishes to trust you now in this crisis, for
there is no one else, and he believes in you."

"I will, Miela," I said solemnly. "Before God I swear it."

The man gazed steadily into my eyes another instant, then abruptly he
thrust a small metal cylinder into my hand. I thrilled as my fingers
closed around it. He seemed to hesitate, then he turned and, slowly
crossing the rooftop, looking neither to right nor left, he descended the
stairs out of our sight.

He had done what he thought was best, and, having done it, had withdrawn
immediately from further participation in the affair.

It may have been the absence of his dominant personality, or the grasp of
my hand about this little metal cylinder, but now I felt a renewed sense
of responsibility, and with it a feeling of power that swept aside all
doubts and all fears. Now I could command, could guide and control, the
destiny of this nation, and could, thank God, save my own world.

"Miela," I said, "tell the queen her son shall be king. I am about to
proclaim him king before the people, and I, as regent, will rule. Tell her
that, and bring him here now to me."

The queen made no answer, save a slight inclination of her head. But I saw
that she had recovered composure. She pushed her son gently away from
her, and I strode forward to meet him.

"Tell him, Miela, he is a man now, and must have no fear, for he is the
greatest man in all this land."

I patted his shoulder as he stood beside me, and he looked up into my face
and smiled bravely.

The top of the parapet was flat and broad. I raised the little boy up and
stood him upon it. Instantly another tumult of shouts arose.

I looked down and saw the figure of Fuero as he stalked unheeding across
the garden, the people respectfully opening up a path before his advance.

Approval and derision seemed mingled in the cries that greeted the
appearance of the little prince.

"Quiet them if you can, Miela," I said. "Speak to them."

I steadied the boy with my hand, and he stood there unafraid, a sturdy,
manly little figure.

Miela raised her voice and began speaking. The shouts partially ceased,
then suddenly a stone struck the parapet almost in front of us.

A sudden rage possessed me. I fumbled at the cylinder I held. It was very
much like a little hand flashlight, and seemed to have a knob at my thumb.
Miela stopped speaking and turned to me.

"There--press that, Alan. Careful! Aim it there! See! Over there against
those palms."

I held the thing up and pointed it toward the huge royal palms, aiming at
their graceful fronds high over the heads of the people. My hand pressed
the knob; the little cylinder seemed to thrill in my grasp. A tiny beam of
light shot out-quite plainly visible--a green, shading into red. It struck
the palm branches, and silently yet rapidly, as though they were under
some giant blow-torch, they shriveled, crackled, and burst into flame.

Miela's fingers bit into my arm. "Enough, Alan! Stop!"

My thumb yielded to the upward pressure of the tiny knob against it, and
abruptly the light vanished. A narrow swath had been cut through the
palms--a furrow of death plowed by the pressure of my thumb against a bit
of metal!

The crowd had frozen into the immobility of terror. Now, as the dreaded
ray vanished as suddenly as it had sprung forth, they turned with cries of
fright to escape. No one had been hurt. I shuddered as I realized now that
many girls had been in the air, and through no thought or skill of mine
had they escaped.

"Speak to them, Alan," Miela cried. "There must be no panic. Here must
they stay and listen to what you have to say. Speak to them; stop them
now."

I handed her the cylinder, lest the diabolical thing spit forth again its
fire from my unskillful fingers, and leaped to the top of the parapet.

"Stop!" I shouted at the top of my voice. "Stop--all of you! At once!"

I waved my arms violently: I knew my words meant nothing, but my voice
carried far. The excitement continued. But a few stopped and stared at me;
then others, and gradually there was less confusion.

Miela turned and shouted something to the girls on the rooftop. Instantly
they spread their wings and flew, down, circling close over the heads of
the people.

"Wait, Alan. A moment now and there will be quiet. The girls are telling
them not to fear, but to wait and listen to what you have to say."

Miela stood now upon the parapet top, with the little prince between us.
She had concealed the tiny metal cylinder in her belt; her open palms were
flung out before her, and her wings, spread and flapping slowly, raised
her on tiptoe. Every line of her graceful body was tense; her attitude
bespoke power, dominance, authority. And then she began to talk in a voice
vibrant with emotion. Once she laid her hand lightly upon the curly head
of the little boy, and a tremulous, uncertain cheer answered her from
below.

"I have told them of the king's death, Alan," she said a moment later,
"and that here is their little king standing before them; And now, of
you--what shall I say?"

"Tell them that until the king is older, I--the man from earth--shall rule
them as regent. Tell them if they obey me all will be well, for I shall
rule them wisely."

I stood while Miela translated this amid dead silence from the crowd. As
she finished I raised myself to full height and stared down at them
threateningly.

"But if there is trouble--if any one defies my authority--then, Miela,
tell them I shall use the light-ray, for I shall brook no interference."

The silence from below continued.

I spread my hands out before me and smiled.

"But there will be no trouble. I am with the Light Country, heart and
soul. Its interests are my interests, for I have married one of its women,
and now I too am one of its people.

"Tao shall be overthrown--tell them that, Miela. The Twilight People never
again shall threaten our cities. If more land is wanted by our people of
the Light Country, tell them they shall have it. All the land they desire
shall be theirs. For when Tao is vanquished I shall build great cars such
as he is building, and all who wish may go to my earth peacefully, and we
will make them welcome as I have been made welcome here."

A cheer arose as Miela translated this; and now for the first time I heard
no cries of dissent.

"Say to them again I shall rule them wisely. Say I shall look to them--all
of them, rich and poor alike--for help in what we have to do. All must
help me, for I am only one, and I need them all. When this work we have to
do is over, when our nation is freed forever from this menace from across
the sea, tell them that then I will give my every thought to the details
of their welfare. All that they wish--if it lays in my power--shall be
done."

A girl alighted for an instant on the parapet near me; another, darted
downward in her flight, evidently to avoid the disrespect of passing
directly in front of me. The thought flashed through my mind that I might
mention the virgins and promise them reversal of the law they so abhorred,
but I felt it would be impolitic to raise that question at such a time as
this.

"Tell them now to leave the grounds, quietly," I concluded. "When I wish
them again they will be sent for. All that I do will be known through
public proclamation."

I lifted the little prince in my arms, and then, with the cheers of the
people ringing in my ears, jumped backward with him to the roof below.

Thus, by swift moving circumstances which could not have been foreseen,
was I made ruler of the Light Country. The crowd dispersed quietly. We
sent the queen and her waiting maids back to her apartments, the aged
councilors to theirs, and soon Miela and I were alone in one of the castle
rooms.

Now that the nervous excitement under which I had been laboring was over,
I felt utterly exhausted. I dropped wearily into a seat, and Miela sat on
the floor at my feet with her arms on my knees.

I stroked her glossy black hair idly.

"I'm tired, girl. I'm all in. Aren't you?"

We had not slept since the afternoon before, and so much had happened
since.

Suddenly I remembered Lua.

"Miela--your mother. We must find her." I started to my feet, then sat
down again.

There was no use of my rushing away on some aimless search over a city
like this.

"Where is the head of the city's police, Miela?"

"I have sent for him. He should be here now to see you."

"I must have him search the city. Lua must be found. The castle guards--we
must appoint others, Miela. I must have a council, too--not doddering old
men, but others that we shall select. Who collects the taxes? Where is the
money? Who handles it?"

The questions piled upon me faster than I could voice them, and all the
while my tired brain and weary, aching body called only for rest--for
sleep.

I thought of Mercer and Anina. They should be back by now.

"We must send home and have them told we are here, Miela. And that slave
woman of Baar's--she will be there, too. She must be sent here to us
also."

We had decided to live in the castle.

"When Mercer and Anina return, we must arrange to go to the Water City.
The disturbance there must be quelled. All the cities must be told of our
actions here. I must visit them all, Miela."

My voice seemed trailing off as though I were talking to myself. A
thousand problems rushed in confusion through my mind. I felt I was
talking almost incoherently. A knock on the door of our room brought me to
myself.

A young girl stood respectfully on the threshold. Miela listened to what
she had to say, questioned her swiftly, and then turned to me. Her face
had gone suddenly white.

"The girls have returned from over the sea, Alan. This is one of them. But
Anina and our friend Ollie have stayed there."

"Stayed there?" I cried. "Why?"

"They set free Tao's men as we planned. They were on their way back when
the earth-man suddenly bid Anina return. Something was wrong, he said.
This girl does not understand what. But they went back. And Anina and
Ollie they left there, standing on the shore together. We are to go over
to the same place to-night, if we can, and get them. That is all the girl
knows."

The girl withdrew after a moment.

Mercer and Anina left in the Twilight Country! Miela and I stared at each
other blankly.



CHAPTER XX.


IN THE TWILIGHT COUNTRY.


Mercer sat on the rear end of the platform and waved good-by vigorously as
he was carried swiftly up and out over the water. Under him was a pile of
blankets and a coat, and beside him a box of baked dough-like bread--the
food he was to turn over to Tao's emissaries when he set them free.

Anina flew at his side, at intervals smiling up at him reassuringly.
Before him on the platform his captives huddled. Although all of them were
trussed up securely, he menacingly kept his little wooden revolver pointed
at them from the level of his knee.

He chuckled as he thought of the fight at the bayou. Everything was
working out all right; it was surprising what one could do with his
physical strength here on Mercury.

The girls had carried the platform up some five hundred feet above the
sea. Mercer turned and looked back. The shore had already dropped almost
to the rim of the close-encircling horizon. He leaned over toward Anina,
resting one hand on the bamboo handle she was holding. "How long will it
take us to get there, Anina?"

He knew the girl would understand his words, but he did not realize she
had little basis for comparing time in his language.

"Long time," she answered, smiling. "But we go quickly now."

He sat back again and waited. It seemed like hours--it _was_ hours
probably, three or four--and still they swept onward straight as an arrow.

After another interminable interval Anina raised one hand and pointed
ahead.

"Twilight Country--there," she said.

Mercer saw, coming up over the horizon, the dim outlines of a rocky land
sparsely covered with trees. It spread out rapidly before him as he
watched, fascinated. It seemed a desolate land, a line of low, barren
hills off to one side, and a forest of stunted, naked-looking trees in
front. The platform swept on over the shore line, a rocky beach on which
the calm sea rolled up in tiny white lines of breakers. Then in a great
curve the girls circled to one side.

"Where are we going?" Mercer asked.

"A trail--near us somewhere. A trail to the Lone City. There we land."

Mercer saw the trail in a moment. It came out of the woods and struck the
shore by a little bight where boats could land. The girls swooped
downward, and in a moment more the platform was lying motionless on the
beach.

Mercer looked around. It was light enough to see objects in the immediate
foreground--a gray twilight. The forest came almost to the water's edge.
He saw now the trees might have been firs, but with small, twisted trunks,
few branches except near the top, and very few leaves. They seemed somehow
very naked and starved--indeed, it surprised him that they could grow at
all in such a rocky waste. The end of the trail was close before him. It
appeared merely an opening in the trees with the fallen logs and
underbrush cleared away.

The girls were obviously cold, standing idle now after their long flight.
Mercer lost no time in preparing for the return journey. He tumbled his
captives unceremoniously off the platform and set the box of food and
blankets beside them.

"What's this, Anina?"

He was holding in his palm a tiny metal cylinder.

Anina took it from him.

"For fire, see?"

She picked up a bit of driftwood, and, holding the end of the cylinder
against it, pressed a little button. A curl of smoke rose from the wood,
and in a moment a wisp of flame.

"A light-ray!" Mercer exclaimed.

"The ray--but different."

She tossed the blazing bit of wood aside, and held her hand a foot or so
in front of the cylinder.

"No danger! See?" She brought her hand closer. "Heat here--close--no heat
far away."

Mercer understood then that this was not a light-ray projector, but a
method of producing heat with the property of radiation, but not of
projection--a different and harmless form of the ray.

He took the little cylinder from the girl, inspected it curiously, then
laid it on the blankets.

"They'll need it, I guess, if it's any colder where they're going."

He set one of the captives free.

"Anina, tell him to sit quiet until we've gone. Then he can cut the others
loose." He tossed a knife into the box. "Come on, Anina; let's get away."

They were about ready to start back, when Mercer suddenly decided he was
hungry. He hopped off the platform. "They don't need all that food."

He gathered some of the little flat cakes of dough in his hands. "Want
some?" He offered them to the girls, who smilingly refused.

"All right. I do. I'm hungry. Might as well take a blanket, too. It's
devilish cold."

He was back on the platform in a moment, sitting down with the blanket
about his knees and munching contentedly at the bread.

"All right, Anina. Start her off."

They swung up into the air and began the return flight.

A few hours more and they would be back at the Great City. Then the real
work would begin. Mercer squared his shoulders unconsciously as he thought
of all there was to do.

But there was no danger to the Light Country from Tao, he thought with
satisfaction. At least, there would be none when the other cities were rid
of Tao's men, as the Great City was now. The men would find their way back
all right--

At the sudden thought that came to him Mercer dropped his bit of bread and
sat up in astonishment. Tao no longer a menace? He remembered my reasoning
in the boat coming down the bayou. Of course, Tao would have no reason to
attack the Light Country by force of arms until he was sure his propaganda
among the people had failed.

My argument was sound enough, but the utter stupidity of what we had done
now dawned on Mercer with overwhelming force. Tao would await the results
of his emissaries' work, of course. And here we had gone and sent them
straight back to their leader to report their efforts a failure! If
anything were needed to precipitate an invasion from Tao, this very thing
Mercer had just finished doing was it. He cursed himself and me fervently
as he thought what fools we had been.

Then it occurred to him perhaps it was not too late to repair the damage.
Not more than half an hour had passed since he had set the men free on the
shore of the Twilight Country. He must go back at once. Under no
circumstances must they be allowed to reach Tao and tell him what had
occurred.

Anina was flying near Mercer as before. He leaned over the edge of the
platform to talk with her, but the wind of their forward flight and the
noise of the girls' wings made conversation difficult.

"Anina! Come up here with me. Sit here. I want to talk to you. It's
important. They don't need you flying now."

Obediently the girl sat where he indicated, close beside him. And then as
he was about to begin telling her what was in his mind Mercer suddenly
remembered that they were still heading toward the Light Country, every
moment getting farther away from Tao's men, whose homeward journey he must
head off some way.

"We must go back, Anina--back where we came from--at once. Tell them--now!
Then I'll tell you why."

The girl's eyes widened, but she did as he directed, and the platform,
making a broad, sweeping turn, headed back toward the Twilight Country
shore.

"Anina, how far is it to Tao's city from where we landed?"

"The Lone City? A day, going fast."

"But they won't go fast, will they? Some of them are pretty badly hurt."

"Two days for them," the girl agreed.

Mercer then told her what an error we had made. She listened quietly, but
he knew she understood, not only his words, but the whole situation as he
viewed it then.

"Most bad," she said solemnly when he paused.

"That's what I want to tell you; it's bad," he declared. "We've got to
head them off some way; stop them somehow. I don't see how we're going to
capture them again--ten of them against me. But we've got to do
something."

Then he asked her about the lay of the country between the shore of the
sea and the Lone City.

Anina's English was put to severe test by her explanation; but she knew
far many more words than she had ever used, and now, with the interest of
what she had to say, she lost much of the diffidence which before had
restrained her.

She told him that the trail led back through the forest for some distance,
and then ran parallel with a swift flowing river. This river, she
explained, emptied into the Narrow Sea a few miles below the end of the
trail. It was the direct water route to the Lone City.

The trail, striking the river bank, followed it up into a mountainous
country--a metallic waste where few trees grew. There was a place still
farther up in a very wild, broken country, where the river ran through a
deep, narrow gorge, and the trail followed a narrow ledge part way up one
of its precipitous sides.

Anina's eyes sparkled with eagerness as she told of it.

"There, my friend Ollie, we stop them. Many loose stones there are, and
the path is very narrow."

Mercer saw her plan at once. They could bar the men's passage somewhere
along this rocky trail, and with stones drive them back. He realized with
satisfaction that he could throw a stone fully twice as large and twice as
far as any of the men, and thus, out of range, bombard them until they
would be glad enough to turn back.

His plan, then, was to land, and with Anina follow the men. The rest of
the girls he would send back to me with the platform, to tell Miela and me
to come over the next evening to the end of the trail.

He and Anina meanwhile would keep close behind the men, and then when the
caon was neared, get around in front of them, and bar their farther
advance. This would be easy since he could walk and run much faster than
they, and Anina could fly. He would drive them back out of the gorge, send
Anina to keep the appointment with me and bring me up to him with the
girls and the platform.

They reached the shore and landed within a few feet of where they had been
an hour before. The men were not in sight; nothing remained to show they
had been there, save pieces of cut cord lying about.

Anina now instructed the girls what to tell me, and in a moment more, with
the blanket and a few pieces of bread, she and Mercer were left standing
alone on the rocky beach. Anina was cold. He took off his fur jacket and
wrapped it about her shoulders.

She made a quaint little picture standing there, with her two long braids
of golden hair, and her blue-feathered wings which the jacket only partly
covered. They started up the trail together. It was almost dark in the
woods, but soon their eyes grew accustomed to the dim light, and they
could see a little better. They walked as rapidly, as Anina was able, for
the men had nearly an hour's start, and Mercer concluded they would be far
ahead.

They had gone perhaps a mile, climbing along over fallen logs, walking
sometimes on the larger tree trunks lying prone--rude bridges by which the
trail crossed some ravine--when Anina said: "I fly now. You wait here,
Ollie, and I find where they are."

She handed him the coat and flew up over the treetops, disappearing almost
immediately in the darkness. Mercer slung the coat around him and sat down
to wait. He sat there perhaps fifteen or twenty minutes, staring up at the
silent, motionless treetops, and thinking all sorts of vague, impossible
dangers impending. Then he heard her wings flapping and saw her flitting
down through the trees.

"Very near, they are," she said as soon as she reached the ground. "A
fire--they have--and they are ready now to sleep."

They went on slowly along the trail, and soon saw the glimmer of a fire
ahead. "A camp for the night," whispered Mercer.

"It must be nearly morning now."

He looked about him and smiled as he realized that no light would come
with the morning. Always this same dim twilight here--and eternal darkness
on ahead. "Good Lord, what a place to live!" he muttered.

They crept on cautiously until they were within sight of the camp. A large
fire was burning briskly. Most of the men were wrapped in their blankets,
apparently asleep; three were sitting upright, on guard. Mercer and Anina
crept away.

"We'd better camp, too," Mercer said when they were well out of hearing.
"They will probably stay there four or five hours, anyway. Lord, I'm
tired." He laid his hand on her shoulder gently, almost timidly. "Aren't
you tired, too, little girl?"

"Yes," she answered simply, and met his eyes with her gentle little smile.
"Oh, yes--I tired. Very much."

They did not dare light a fire, nor had they any means of doing so. They
went back from the trail a short distance, finding a little recess between
two fallen logs, where the ground was soft with a heavy moss. Here they
decided to sleep for a few hours.

A small pool of water had collected on a barren surface of rock near by,
and from this they drank. Then they sat down, together and ate about half
the few remaining pieces of bread which Mercer was carrying in the pockets
of his jacket. They were both tired out. Anina particularly was very
sleepy.

When they had finished eating Anina lay down, and Mercer covered her with
the blanket. She smiled up at him.

"Good night, Anina."

"Good night, my friend Ollie."

She closed her eyes, snuggling closer under the blanket with a contented
little sigh. Mercer put on his jacket and sat down beside her, his chin
cupped in his hand. It seemed colder now. His trousers were thin, his legs
felt numb and stiff from his recent exertion.

He sat quiet, staring at the sleeping girl. She was very beautiful and
very sweet, lying there with her golden hair framing her face, her little
head pillowed on her arms, a portion of one blue-feathered wing peeping
out from under the blanket. All at once Mercer bent over and kissed her
lightly, brushing her lips with his, as one kisses a sleeping child.

She stirred, then opened her eyes and smiled up at him again.

"You cold, Ollie," she said accusingly. She lifted an edge of the blanket.
"Here--you sleep, too."

He stretched himself beside her, and she flung a corner of the blanket
over him; and thus, like two children lost in the woods and huddled
together for warmth under a fallen log, they slept.



CHAPTER XXI.


ANOTHER LIGHT-RAY!


The news that Mercer and Anina had been left in the Twilight Country
completely dumfounded Miela and me. "Something was wrong," Mercer had
said. And then they had insisted on staying there, and had sent the girls
back to tell me to come over.

We could make nothing of it, nor did the half hour of argument into which
we immediately plunged further enlighten us. That flaw in our plans which
had dawned on Mercer so suddenly and clearly certainly never occurred to
us, for all it was seemingly so obvious.

We were interrupted--having reached no conclusion whatever except that we
would go over that evening as Mercer had directed--by the arrival of the
police chief to see me. He was a little man, curiously thin and wizened
for a Mercutian, with wide pantaloons, a shirt, short jacket and little
triangular cocked hat. His face seemed pointed, like a ferret. His
movements were rapid, his roving glance peculiarly alert.

He bowed before me obsequiously. He would obey me to the letter, I could
see that at once from his manner; though, had I impressed him as being
like my predecessor, I did not doubt but that he would do as he pleased
upon occasion.

I toyed with the little light-ray cylinder in my hand quite casually
through the brief interview, and I saw he was thoroughly impressed, for he
seemed unable to take his eyes from it.

"Where are your men just now?" I asked.

He raised his hands deprecatingly and poured out a flood of words to Miela
when my question was translated to him.

"He himself was sleeping," she said to me when he had paused for breath.
"His third watch was on patrol about the city. Then from the castle came
the king's guards, fleeing in haste. Those of the police they met they
told that evil men were in the castle with the light-ray, and all who
represented the city's authority would be killed."

"That was a lie," I interrupted. "There was no light-ray here then."

Miela nodded. "It was what Baar's men had told them to say, I think."

"And then what happened to the police?"

"Then they left their posts about the city. Some fled; others went back
and reported what they had heard."

"And it never occurred to any of them to come up here and try to stop the
disturbance? Curious policemen, these!"

"It is too deadly--the light-ray," said Miela. "They were afraid. And then
the alarm bell began ringing. They sent for Ano, here, to ask him what
they should do. And then you sent for him. He has his men at the police
building, in waiting. And he comes to you at the risk of his life, and now
asks your commands."

Thus did my chief of police explain satisfactorily to himself, and with
great protestations of loyalty to his trust, how it came about that he and
his men did nothing while their king was being murdered and another put in
his place.

Recriminations seemed useless. He stood bowing and scraping before me,
eager only to obey my slightest wish.

"Tell him, Miela, how Baar's men captured Lua. Have the city, thoroughly
searched--Baar's house particularly. Tell him _I_ killed Baar's wife. Have
that slave woman sent home to me.

"Tell him to capture Baar and any of his known associates. If he does,
have him report to me at once. Say to him that I must have word of Lua--or
I'll have a new chief of police by to-morrow. For the rest, have his men
patrol the city as usual."

I spoke as sternly as I could, and the little man received my words with
voluble protestations of extreme activity on his part.

When he had bowed himself out I smiled at Miela hopelessly.

"This has got to be a mighty different government before we can ever hope
to accomplish anything against Tao." Tao was not worrying me for the
moment. Lua must be found, and I had no idea of relying entirely upon this
little chief of police to find her. And Mercer needed me, too, this very
evening.

I stood up wearily and put my arm about Miela's shoulders. Her little body
drooped against mine, her head resting on my shoulder. There was little
about us then, as we stood there dispirited and physically tired out, that
would have commended respect from our subjects.

"We _must_ get some sleep, Miela," I said. "Things will look very
different to us then."

It must have been mid-afternoon when we awoke. Ano was at hand to report
that Baar and his men, and all the king's guards, must have fled the city.
Of Lua he had, so far, found no trace. Baar's slave woman was in the
castle, waiting our commands. The girl who had brought us Mercer's message
was also waiting to ask us when we wanted her and the other girls for the
trip back to the Twilight Country.

"Right away," I exclaimed. "I'm not going to take any chances with Mercer.
We'll start at once."

The girl flew away to get her friends and the platform, which had been
left in the garden of Miela's home. I planned to start openly from the
castle roof; there was now no need of maintaining secrecy.

The disappearance of Lua was alarming. Equally so was the possible danger
into which Mercer might have blundered. In Lua's case there did not seem
much I could do personally at that moment. Before starting I arranged with
the aged councilors to call a meeting the following morning of all
government officials.

"Could we get Fuero to come, Miela?"

She shook her head positively. "His oath would forbid it."

"Well, tell the councilors to call also any of the city's prominent men.
I've got to get some good men with me. I can't do it all alone."

Miela smiled at me quizzically as I said this: "You have forgotten our
women and their help, my husband?"

I had, in very truth, for the moment.

"We'll need them, too," I said. "Tell these girls who carry us to-night to
call all those who went with us to the mountains--a meeting to-morrow at
this time--here on the castle roof."

"To the Water City we must go," Miela said. "There Tao's men are very
strong, our girls report. And to-day there was a fight among the people,
and several were killed."

"But we must go armed, Miela, with more than one light-ray. I shall see
this Fuero to-morrow. After all, he's the key-note to the whole thing."

We started from the castle roof, Miela sitting with me this time on the
platform. Flying low, we passed over the maze of bayous, and in what
seemed an incredibly short time we were out over the sea. I had now no
idea what we might be called upon to do, or how long we would be gone, for
all my specific plans for the next day; so we started as well prepared as
possible.

The precious light-ray cylinder I held in my hand. We had a number of
blankets, enough food for us all for two days of careful rationing, a
knife or two, and a heavy, sharp-edged metal implement like an ax.

It seemed hardly more than half an hour before a great black cloud had
spread over the whole sky, and we ran into the worst storm I have ever
encountered. The wind came up suddenly, and we fought our way directly
into it. Lightning flashed about us, and then came the rain, slanting down
in great sheets.

We were still flying low. The mirror surface of the sea was now lashed
with waves, extraordinarily high, whose white tops blew away in long
streaks of scud. The girls fought sturdily against the wind and rain,
carrying us steadily up until after a while I could not see the water
below.

We were in the storm perhaps an hour altogether. Then we passed up and
beyond it; and emerged again into that gray vacancy, with a waste of
storm-lashed water far beneath us.

The Twilight Country shore was still below the horizon, and it was a
considerable time before we sighted it. Miela and I sat quiet, wrapped in
a blanket, which, wet as it was, offered some protection against the
biting wind. The girls seemed exhausted from their long struggle against
the storm, and I was glad for them when we finally landed.

This was the place, they said, where Mercer and Anina had set Tao's men
free, and where the two were standing when the girls had left with the
platform. I looked about, and saw on the beach the pieces of cut cord with
which the men had been bound.

Of Mercer and Anina there was no sign. We waited until well after the time
of the evening meal, and still Mercer and Anina did not arrive. We
concluded, of course, that they had followed Tao's men up the trail for
some reason, and we expected it would be Anina who would come back to tell
us where Mercer was.

"Let us go up a little distance," Miela suggested finally. "They cannot
tell what the hour is. They may be near here now, coming back."

The girls were rested and warmed now, and we started off again with the
platform. We flew low over the treetops, following the trail as best we
could, but in the semi-darkness we could see very little from above. After
a time we gave it up and returned to the shore.

Again we waited, now very much alarmed. And then finally we decided to
return to the Great City for the night. Anina might have missed us some
way, we thought, and flown directly home. She might be there waiting for
us when we arrived. If not, we would return again with several hundred
girls, and with them scour the country carefully back as near the Lone
City as we dared go.

With our hearts heavy with apprehension we started back across the
channel. Lua, Mercer and Anina were separated from us. All had been
captured, perhaps, by our enemies! Things were, indeed, in a very bad way.

Without unusual incident we sighted the Light Country shore. Three girls
were winging their way swiftly toward us.

"They wish to speak with us, Alan," said Miela. "From the Great City they
seem to come. Perhaps it is Anina."

Our hopes were soon dispelled, for Anina was not one of them; they were
three of the girls we had directed to patrol the seacoast.

When they neared us Miela flew off the platform and joined them. They
circled about for a time, flying close together, then Miela left them and
returned to me, while they hovered overhead. Her face was clouded with
anxiety as she alighted beside me.

"They were near the Water City a short time ago. And they say the
light-ray is being used there. They saw it flashing up, and dared not go
closer."

The light-ray in the Water City! My heart sunk with dismay. The cylinder I
held in my hand I had thought the only one in use in all the Light
Country. With it I felt supreme. And now they had it also in the Water
City!

One of the girls flung up her hand suddenly and called to Miela.

"See, Alan--a boat!"

I looked down to where Miela pointed. The sea was still rough from the
storm, but no longer lashed into fury. Coming toward us, close inshore and
from the direction of the Water City, I saw a boat speeding along over the
spent waves. And as I looked, a narrow beam of light, green, shading into
red, shot up from the boat and hung wavering in the air like a little
search-light striving to pierce the gray mist of the sky!



CHAPTER XXII.


THE THEFT OF THE LIGHT-RAY.


The touch of soft, cool hands on his face brought Mercer back to sudden
consciousness. He opened his eyes; Anina was sitting beside him, regarding
him gravely.

"Wake up, my friend Ollie. Time now to wake up."

He sat up, rubbing his eyes. The same dim twilight obscured everything
around. For an instant he was confused.

"Why, I've been asleep." He got to his feet. "Do you think it's been long,
Anina? Maybe the men have started off. Let's go see."

Anina had already been to see; she had awakened some little time before
and, leaving Mercer asleep, had flown up ahead over the treetops.

The men were just then breaking camp, and she had returned to wake up
Mercer. They ate their last remaining pieces of bread, drank from the
little pool of water, and were soon ready to start on after their quarry.

"How long will it take them to reach the gorge, Anina?"

"Not very long--four times farther reach Lone City."

By which Mercer inferred that within three or four hours, perhaps, they
would be at the place where they hoped to turn the men back.

They started off slowly up the trail, Mercer carrying the folded blanket,
and Anina wearing the fur jacket. They soon came upon the smoldering fire
that marked the other party's night encampment. The men were, Mercer
judged, perhaps a mile or so ahead of them.

They continued on, walking slowly, for they did not want to overtake the
slow-traveling men ahead. The look of the country, what they could see of
it in the darkness, was unchanged. The trail seemed bending steadily to
the right, and after a time they came to the bank of a river which the
trail followed. It was a broad stream, perhaps a quarter of a mile across,
with a considerable current sweeping down to the sea.

They kept to the trail along the river bank for nearly another hour. Then
Anina abruptly halted, pulling Mercer partly behind a tree trunk.

"Another fire," she whispered. "They stop again."

They could see the glow of the fire, close by the river bank among the
trees. Very cautiously they approached and soon made out the vague
outlines of a boat moored to the bank. It seemed similar to the one in
which they had come down the bayous from the Great City, only slightly
larger.

"Other men," whispered Anina. "From Lone City."

Mercer's heart sank. A party from the Lone City--more of Tao's men to join
those he had set free! All his fine plans were swept away. The men would
all go up to the Lone City now in the boat, of course. There was nothing
he could do to stop them. And now Tao would learn of the failure of his
plans.

Mercer's first idea was to give up and return to the shore of the sea; but
Anina kept on going cautiously forward, and he followed her.

The fire, they could see as they got closer, was built a little back from
the water, with a slight rise of ground between it and the boat. There
were some thirty men gathered around; they seemed to be cooking.

"You stand here, Ollie," Anina whispered. "I go hear what they say. Stand
very quiet and wait. I come back."

Mercer sat down with his back against a tree and waited. Anina disappeared
almost immediately. He heard no sound of her flight, but a moment later he
thought he saw her dropping down through the trees just outside the circle
of light from the fire. From where he was sitting he could see the boat
also; he thought he made out the figure of a man sitting in it, on guard.
The situation, as Mercer understood it from what Anina told him when she
returned, seemed immeasurably worse even than he had anticipated.

Tao had been making the Water City the basis of his insidious propaganda,
rather than the Great City, as we had supposed. He had been in constant
communication by boat with his men in the Water City; and now affairs
there were ripe for more drastic operations.

This boat Mercer had come upon was intended to be Tao's first armed
invasion of the Light Country--some twenty of his most trusted men armed
with the light-ray. Joining his emissaries in the Water City, and with the
large following among the people there which they had already secured,
they planned to seize the government and obtain control of the city. Then,
using it as a base, they could spread out for a conquest of the entire
nation. Mercer listened with whitening face while Anina told him all this
as best she could.

"But--but why does he want to attack the Light Country, Anina? I thought
he wanted to go and conquer our earth."

"Very big task--your earth," the girl answered. "Light Country more easy.
Many light-rays in the Great City. Those he needs before he goes to your
earth. More simple to get those than make others."

Mercer understood it then. The large quantity of light-ray ammunition
stored in the Great City was what Tao was after. This was his way of
getting it, and once he had it, and control of the Light Country besides
he would be in a much better position to attack the earth.

The idea came to Mercer then to steal the boat and escape with it. If he
could do that, the enemies would have to return to the Lone City on foot,
and the threatened invasion of the Light Country would thus be postponed
for a time at least. Meanwhile, with the boat he could hasten back to me
with news of the coming invasion.

These thoughts were running through his head while Anina was talking. It
was a daring plan, but it might be done. There was apparently only one man
in the boat, and the slight rise of ground between it and the fire made
him out of sight, though not out of hearing, of the others.

"Can you run the boat, Anina?"

The girl nodded eagerly. Mercer drew a long breath.

"We'll take a chance. It's the only way. They've got that cursed
light-ray." He shivered as he thought of the danger they were about to
invite.

Then he explained to Anina what they were to do. She listened carefully,
with the same expectant, eager look on her face he had seen there so often
before.

They left the blanket and fur jacket on the ground, and, making a wide
detour around the fire, came back to the river bank several hundred yards
above the boat. They stood at the water's edge, looking about them. The
boat was just around a slight bend in the stream; the glimmer of the fire
showed plainly among the trees. Intense quiet prevailed; only the murmur
of the water flowing past, and occasionally the raised voice of one of the
men about the fire, broke the stillness.

Mercer stared searchingly into the girl's eyes as she stood there quietly
at his side. She met his gaze steadily.

"You're a wonderful little girl," he whispered to her, and then abruptly
added: "Come on. Don't make any splash if you can help it. And remember,
if anything goes wrong, never mind me. Fly away--if you can."

They waded slowly into the water. The current carried them rapidly along.
Side by side, with slow, careful strokes, they swam, keeping close to
shore. The river was shallow--hardly over their heads. The water was cold
and, Mercer thought, curiously buoyant.

It seemed hardly more than a moment before the shadowy black figure of
outlines of the boat loomed ahead. They could make out the figure of its
single occupant, sitting with his arm on the gunwale. They swam hardly at
all now, letting the current carry them forward. As silent as two drifting
logs they dropped down upon the boat and in another moment were clinging
to a bit of rope that chanced to be hanging over its stern.

The bow of the boat was nosed against the bank; it lay diagonally
downstream, with its stern some twenty feet from shore. Its occupant was
sitting amidships, facing the bow. Mercer drew himself up until his eyes
were above the stern of the boat and saw him plainly. He was slouching
down as though dozing. His elbow was crooked, carelessly over the gunwale.

Mercer's heart gave an exultant leap as he saw a little cylinder in the
man's hand. There was a little projection on the boat at the water line,
and, working along this with his hands, Mercer edged slowly toward the
man. He knew he could not be heard, for the murmur of the water slipping
past the sides of the boat drowned the slight noise he made.

He edged his way along, with not much more than his face out of water,
until he was directly beneath the motionless form in the boat.

Mercer's heart was beating so it seemed to smother him. Slowly he pulled
himself up until the fingers of his left hand gripped the gunwale hardly
more than a foot or two behind the man's back. His other hand reached
forward. He must have made a slight noise, for the man sat suddenly
upright, listening.

Mercer's right hand shot out. His fingers closed over the little cylinder
and the hand holding it. He bent it inward, twisting the man's wrist. His
thumb fumbled for the little button Anina had described. There was a tiny
puff of light; the man's body wavered, then fell forward inert. Mercer
climbed into the boat. He looked back. Anina was pulling herself up over
the stern. A long pole lay across the seats. He picked it up and started
with it toward the bow. And then he tripped over something and fell
headlong, dropping the pole with a clatter.

As he picked himself up there came a shout from the men in the woods.
Mercer hurried forward and cast off the rope that held the boat to the
bank. It had been tied more or less permanently at this end. As he fumbled
at the knots he heard Anina's soft, anxious voice calling: "Hurry, Ollie,
hurry!"

The shouts from the woods continued. The knots loosened finally. The boat
slid back away from the bank; with the pole Mercer shoved the bow around.
An instant later Anina had started the mechanism, and in a broad curve
they swung silently out into the river.

Up from the woods shot a beam of the greenish-red light. It darted to and
fro for an instant, almost vertically in the air, and Mercer heard the
crackle of the tree-tops as they burst into flame under its heat. Then it
swung downward, but before it could reach the water level the rise of
ground at the bank cut it off.

Without realizing it, Mercer had been holding his breath as he watched.
Now he let it out with a long sigh of relief.

"We did it, Anina--we did it," he said exultantly. "And we've got a
light-ray, too."

A moment later they swept around a bend in the river, out of sight and out
of hearing of their enemies.



CHAPTER XXIII.


THE STORM.


On the little stern seat of the boat Mercer and Anina sat side by side,
the girl steering by a small tiller that lay between them. They were well
out in the middle of the river now, speeding silently along with its swift
current. They made extraordinary speed. Both banks of the river were
visible in the twilight--dim, wooded hills stretching back into darkness.

The stream widened steadily as they advanced, until near, its mouth it had
become a broad estuary. They followed its right shore now and soon were
out in the Narrow Sea.

"We'd better go right on across," said Mercer. "It's too early for Alan to
be at the end of the trail. He won't be there till to-night. We can reach
the Great City before he starts."

They decided to do that, and headed straight out into the sea. They had
been cold, sitting there in the wind, and wet to the skin. But the boat
contained several furry jackets, which the men had left in it, and in the
bottom, near the stern, a cubical metal box which lighted up like an
electric radiator. By this they had dried and warmed themselves, and now,
each with a fur jacket on, they felt thoroughly comfortable.

Mercer was elated at what they had accomplished. He could see now how
fortunate a circumstance it was that we had set the men free. He would not
have stumbled upon this other party, and the invasion of the Light Country
would have begun, had we not released them.

He talked enthusiastically about what we were to do next, and Anina
listened, saying very little, but following his words with eager
attention. Once he thought she was more interested in the words themselves
than in what he was saying, and said so.

"Your language--so very easy it is. I want to learn it soon if I can."

"Why, you know it already," he protested. "And how the deuce you ever got
it so quickly beats me."

She smiled.

"When you say words--very easy then for me to remember. Not many words in
spoken language."

He shook his head.

"Well, however you do it, the result's all right. I'm mighty glad, too.
Why, when I get you back home on earth--" He stopped in sudden confusion.

She put her hand on his arm.

"Miela says your earth is very wonderful. Tell me about it."

She listened to his glowing words. "And opera--what is that?" she asked
once when he paused.

He described the Metropolitan Opera House, and the newer, finer one in
Boston. She listened to his description of the music with flushed face and
shining eyes.

"How beautiful--that music! Can _you_ sing, Ollie?"

"No," he admitted, "but I can play a little on a guitar. I wish I had one
here."

"I can sing," said the girl: "Miela says I can sing very well."

He leaned toward her, brushing the blue feathers of her wing lightly with
his hand.

"Sing for me," he said softly. "I'll bet you sing beautifully."

It may have been their situation, or what they had been through together,
or the girl's nearness to him now with her long braids of golden hair, the
graceful sweep of her blue-feathered wings that matched the blue of her
eyes, her red lips parted in song--but whatever it was, Mercer thought he
had never heard so sweet a voice. She sang a weird little song. It was in
a minor key, with curious cadences that died away and ended nowhere--the
folk song of a different race, a different planet, yet vibrant with the
ever unsatisfied longing of the human soul.

She sang softly, staring straight before her, without thought of her
singing, thinking only of her song. She ended with a tender phrase that
might have been a sigh--a quivering little half sob that died away in her
throat and left the song unfinished. Her hands were folded quiet in her
lap; her eyes gazed out on the gray waste of water about the boat.

Mercer breathed again.

"That is beautiful, Anina. What is it?"

She turned to him and smiled.

"Just love song. You like it, my friend Ollie?"

"It's wonderful. But it's--it's so sad--and--and sort of weird isn't it?"

"That is love, my mother says. Love is sad."

Mercer's heart was beating fast.

"Is it always sad, Anina? I don't think so--do you?"

There was no trace of coquetry in her eyes; she sighed tremulously.

"I do not know about love. But what I feel here"--she put her hand on her
breast--"I do not understand, Ollie. And when I sing--they are very sad
and sweet, the thoughts of music, and they say things to the heart that
the brain does not understand. Is it that way with you?"

Unnoticed by the two, a storm cloud had swept up over the horizon behind
them, and the sky overhead was blotted now with its black. They had not
seen it nor heeded the distant flashing of lightning. A sudden thunderclap
startled them now into consciousness of the scene about them. The wind
rushed on them from behind. The sea was rising rapidly; the boat scudded
before it.

"A storm! Look at it, Anina, behind us!"

There was nothing in sight now but the gray sea, broken into waves that
were beginning to curl, white and angry. Behind them the darkness was
split with jagged forks of lightning. The thunder rolled heavily and
ominously in the distance, with occasional sharp cracks near at hand.

"Look, Anina--there comes the rain! See it there behind us! I hope it
won't be a bad storm. I wouldn't want to be out in this little tub."

The wind veered to the left, increasing steadily. The sea was lashed into
foam; its spray swept over the boat, drenching them thoroughly.

The waves, turning now with the wind, struck the boat on its stern
quarter. One curled aboard, sloshing an inch or two of water about the
bottom of the boat. Mercer feared it would interfere with the mechanism,
but Anina reassured him.

As the waves increased in size, Mercer swung the boat around so as to run
directly before them. The stern frequently was lifted clear of the water
now, the boat losing headway as a great cloud of hissing steam arose from
behind.

After a time the Light Country shore came into sight. They were close upon
it before they saw it through the rain and murk. They seemed to be heading
diagonally toward it.

"Where are we, Anina?" Mercer asked anxiously.

The girl shook her head.

Steadily they were swept inward. The shore line, as they drew closer, was
to Mercer quite unfamiliar. There were no bayous here, no inundated land.
Instead, a bleak line of cliffs fronted them--a perpendicular wall against
which the waves beat furiously. They could see only a short distance. The
line of cliffs extended ahead of them out of sight in the gray of the
sheets of rain.

They were slanting toward the cliffs, and Mercer knew if he did not do
something they would be driven against them in a few moments more.

"We'll have to turn out, Anina. We can't land along here. We must keep
away if we can."

With the waves striking its stern quarter again, the boat made much
heavier weather. It seemed to Mercer incredible that it should stay
afloat. He found himself thoroughly frightened now, but when he remembered
that Anina was in no danger he felt relieved. He had made her lie down in
the boat, where she would be more sheltered from the wind and rain. Now he
hastily bade her get up and sit beside him.

"We might be swamped any minute, Anina. You sit there where you won't get
caught if we go over."

They swept onward, Mercer keeping the boat offshore as best he could.

"Haven't you any idea where we are, Anina? How far along do these cliffs
extend?"

A huge, jagged pinnacle of rock, like a great cathedral spire set in the
cliff, loomed into view ahead. Anina's face brightened, when she saw it.

"The way to the Water City," she cried. "A river there is--ahead. Not so
very far now."

In spite of all Mercer could do, they were blowing steadily closer to the
wave-lashed cliffs.

He began to despair. "If anything happens, Anina--you fly up at once. You
hear? Don't you wait. You can't help me any. I'll make out some way. You
say good-by to Alan and your mother and sister for me--if--" He fell
silent a moment, then said softly: "And, Anina, if that should happen, I
want you to know that I think you're the sweetest, most wonderful little
girl I ever met. And, Anina dear--"

The girl gripped his arm with a cry of joy.

"See, Ollie! There, ahead, the cliffs end. That is the Water City river!
See it there?"

The mouth of a broad estuary, with the waves rolling up into it, came
swiftly into view. They rounded the rocky headland and entered it, running
now almost directly before the wind. The river narrowed after a short
distance to a stream very much like the one they had left in the Twilight
Country.

Mercer turned to the quiet little girl beside him.

"Well, Anina, we've certainly had some trip. I wouldn't want to go through
it again."

Mercer thought the situation over. They could stay where they were in the
river for an hour or two until the storm was entirely over, and then go
back to the Great City. On the other hand, now that they were here, Mercer
felt a great curiosity to see this other city where Tao's men had created
trouble. Why should they not use these few hours of waiting to see it?

"We might get a line on how things stand up there to tell Alan when we get
back," Mercer said when he explained his ideas to Anina. "It won't take
long." Very probably it was the light-ray cylinder in his hand which
influenced his decision, for he added: "We can't get into any trouble, you
know; there's no light-ray here yet."

And so they went on.

There was a perceptible current coming down the river. The water was cold
and clear, and in the brighter light now he could see down into it in many
places to the bottom, six or eight feet below. The region seemed utterly
uninhabited; no sign of a house or even a boat on the river met them as
they advanced.

"Mightn't there be boats along here?" Mercer asked once. "How far up _is_
this place?"

"Not far now--beyond there."

The river appeared to terminate abruptly up ahead against the side of a
frowning brown cliff, but Mercer saw a moment later that it opened out
around a bend to the left.

"Around that next bend?"

She nodded.

It seemed incredible to Mercer that the second largest city in Mercury lay
hidden in the midst of this desolation.

"We'll meet boats," he said. "What will the people think of me? Don't
let's start anything if we can help it."

"You lie there." Anina indicated the bottom of the boat at her feet. "No
one see you then. I steer. They do not notice me. Nobody care who I am."

Mercer had still the very vaguest of ideas as to what they would do when
they got to the Water City. As a matter of fact, he really was more
curious just to see it than anything else. But there was another reason
that urged him on. Both he and Anina were hungry.

They had eaten very little since leaving the Great City the night before;
and now that it was again evening, they were famished. They had rummaged
the boat thoroughly, but evidently the men had taken all their supplies
ashore with them, for nothing was in the boat.

"We'll have to dope out some way to get something to eat," said Mercer.

They came upon the sharp bend in the river Anina had indicated. Following
close against one rocky shore, they swept around the bend, and the Water
City lay spread out before Mercer's astonished eyes.



CHAPTER XXIV.


THE WATER CITY.


It had stopped raining; the sky overhead was luminous with diffused
sunlight; the scene that lay before Mercer was plainly visible. The river
had opened abruptly into a broad, shallow, nearly circular lake, some five
or six miles across. The country here showed an extraordinary change from
that they had passed through. The lake appeared to occupy a depression in
the surrounding hills, like the bottom of a huge, shallow bowl. From the
water's edge on all sides the ground sloped upward. It was no longer a
barren, rocky land, but seemingly covered with a rich heavy soil, dotted
with tropical trees. That it was under a high state of cultivation was
evident. Mercer saw tier upon tier of rice terraces on the hillsides.

But what astonished him most was the city itself. It covered almost the
entire surface of the lake--a huge collection of little palm-thatched
shacks built upon platforms raised above the water on stilts. Some of the
houses were larger and built of stone, with their foundations in the
water.

Off to one side were two or three little islands, an acre or less in
extent, fringed with palms and coconut trees. In nearly the center of the
lake stood a stone castle, two stories in height, with minarets
ornamenting its corners. An open stretch of water surrounded it.

There was little of regularity about this extraordinary city, and no
evidence of streets, for the houses were set down quite haphazard wherever
open space afforded. In some places they were more crowded together than
others, although seldom closer than twenty or thirty feet.

Around the larger ones there was a little more open water, as though the
owners controlled it and forbade building there. Some of the smaller
houses were connected by little wooden bridges. Anina said this was where
two or more families of relatives had located together.

There were a few boats moving about--little punts hollowed out of logs and
propelled by long poles--and Mercer saw many others, some of them larger
like the one he and Anina were in, tied up by the houses. It was now the
time of the evening meal. The workers had returned from the terraces;
there were few moving about the city. Occasionally a girl would dart up
from one of the houses and wing her way to another, but beyond that there
were no signs of activity.

Anina took command of the boat now, slowing it down and heading for the
nearest of the houses, which were hardly more than quarter of a mile away.
Mercer stretched himself out in the bottom of the boat, covering himself
with a large piece of fabric that lay there. He felt that he would be
unnoticed, even should a girl chance to pass directly overhead. But he
could see nothing of the city from where he was, and soon grew restless
and anxious to do something else.

"I'm coming up, Anina," he said once. "Shucks! Nobody can do anything to
us. Haven't I got this light-ray?"

But Anina was obdurate, and made him stay where he was.

They went slowly forward and were soon among the houses. On the front
platform of one a man sat fishing. A little naked boy slid down into the
water from another, swimming as though born to the water. Both stared at
Anina curiously as she passed slowly by, but they said nothing. A girl
looked out of the window of another house and waved her hand in friendly
greeting, which Anina answered.

Mercer, lying with all but his face covered by the cloth, could see only
the sides of the boat, the bottom of the cross-seat over his head, and
Anina as she sat above him in the stern.

"Where do you suppose the Tao people hang out around here?" he suddenly
asked. "If we could--"

The girl silenced him with a gesture.

He lowered his voice. "Try and find out where they are, Anina," he
whispered.

Anina steered the boat directly under several of the houses, which must
have been quite a usual proceeding, for it attracted no attention. A girl
flew close to them once, and Anina called to her. The girl alighted on the
stern of the boat for a moment; Mercer slid the cloth over his face and
held himself motionless. Then he heard Anina's voice calling to him
softly. He slid the cloth back; the girl had gone.

"She says Tao's men live, there--large house, of wood," said Anina,
pointing off to one side.

Mercer nearly rapped his head against the seat above him in his
excitement.

"You know which house? Let's go there. Maybe we can hear what they're
saying. Can we get under it?"

She nodded.

"Let's try, Anina," he said eagerly. "You steer us slow right under it,
just as if you were going past. If there's nobody in sight you can stop
underneath, can't you? Maybe we can hear what they're saying."

"I try," the girl said simply.

"I'll lay still," encouraged Mercer. "Nobody will bother about you. Just
sneak in and see what happens. If anybody sees you, keep going."

He was all excitement, and in spite of Anina's protests wriggled about
continually, trying to see where they were.

The house that the girl had pointed out lay only a few hundred yards
ahead. It was one of the largest of the wooden buildings--sixty or seventy
feet long at least--single story, with a high sloping thatched roof.

It was raised on a platform some six feet above the water, which, in
front, had a little flight of wooden steps leading down to the surface.
There was a hundred feet of open water on all sides of the building. The
boat, moving slowly, slipped through the water almost without a sound.

"Where are we now?" Mercer whispered impatiently. "Aren't we there yet?"

The girl put a finger to her lips. "Almost there. Quiet now."

She steered straight for the house. There was no one in sight, either
about the house itself or about those in its immediate vicinity. A moment
more and the boat slid beneath the building into semidarkness.

Anina shut the power off and stood up. The floor of the house was just
above her head. In front of her, near the center of the building, she saw
the side walls of an inner inclosure some twenty feet square. These walls
came down to the surface, making a room like a basement to the dwelling. A
broad doorway, with a sliding door that now stood open, gave ingress.

The boat had now almost lost headway. Anina nosed its bow into this
doorway, and grasping one of the pilings near at hand, brought it to rest.

Mercer, at a signal from her, climbed cautiously to his feet, still
holding the little light-ray cylinder in his hand.

"What's that in there?" he whispered.

Beyond the doorway, through which the bow of the boat projected, there was
complete darkness.

"Lower room," Anina whispered back. "Store things in there. And boat
landing, too."

"Let's go in and see."

Mercer started toward the bow of the boat. Six feet or more of it was
inside the doorway. He made his way carefully into the bow, and found
himself inside the basement of the house.

In the dimness of this interior he could just make out the outlines of
things around. The doorway was located at a corner of the inclosure. In
front lay a small open space of water. At one side a platform about two
feet above the surface formed the floor of the room. A tiny punt lay
moored to it. Farther back a small, steep flight of steps led up through a
rectangular opening to the building above.

Most of the light in this lower room came down through this opening; and
now, as Mercer stood quiet looking about him, he could hear plainly the
voices of men in the room above.

Anina was beside him.

"They're up there," he whispered, pointing. "Let's land and see if we can
get up those stairs a ways and hear what they're saying."

They stood a moment, undecided, and then from the silence and darkness
about them they distinctly heard a low muffled sound.

"What's that?" whispered Mercer, startled. "Didn't you hear that, Anina?
There's something over there by the bottom of the steps."

They listened, but only the murmur of the voices from above, and an
occasional footstep, broke the stillness.

"I tell you I heard something," Mercer persisted. "There's something over
there." He rattled a bit of rope incautiously, as if to startle a rat from
its hiding place. "Let's tie up, Anina."

They made the boat fast, but in such a way that they could cast it loose
quickly.

"We might want to get out of here in a hurry," Mercer whispered with a
grin. "You never can tell, Anina."

He stood stock still. The sound near at hand was repeated. It was
unmistakable this time--a low, stifled moan.

Mercer stepped lightly out of the boat onto the platform. A few boxes, a
coil of rope, and other odds and ends stood about. He felt his way forward
among them toward the bottom of the steps. He heard the moan again, and
now he saw the outlines of a human figure lying against the farther wall.

Anina was close behind him.

"There's somebody over there," he whispered. "Hurt or sick, maybe."

They crept forward.

It was a woman, bound hand and foot and gagged. Mercer bent over and tore
the cloth from her face. In another instant Anina was upon her knees,
sobbing softly, with her mother's head in her lap.

They loosed the cords that held her, and chaffed her stiffened limbs. She
soon recovered, for she was not injured. She told Anina her story
then--how Baar had captured her in her home while she was waiting for
Miela and me, and how two of his men had brought her here to the Water
City by boat at once.

That was all she knew, except that this house was the headquarters of
Tao's emissaries, who, it appeared, were now allied with Baar and his
party.

Anina whispered all this to Mercer when her mother had finished.

"Let's get out of here," said Mercer.

The responsibility of two women, especially the elder Lua, who could not
fly, weighed suddenly upon him, and his first thought was to get back to
the Great City at once.

Anina helped her mother into the boat.

"Wait," she whispered to Mercer. "I hear what they say. You wait here."

She went to the foot of the steps and began climbing them cautiously.

"Not on your life, I won't wait here," Mercer muttered to himself, and,
gripping the light-ray cylinder firmly as though he feared it might get
away from him, he joined Anina on the stairway.

Slowly, cautiously they made their way upward. The steps were fairly wide,
and they went up almost side by side. From near the top they could see a
portion of the room above.

The corner of a table showed, around which a number of men were gathered,
eating. A woman was moving about the room serving them.

Their words, from here, were plainly audible. Mercer would have gone a
step or two higher, without thought of discovery, but Anina held him back.
"Wait, Ollie. I hear now what they say."

They stood silent. The men were talking earnestly. Mercer could hear their
words, but of course understood nothing he heard.

"What do they say, Anina?" he whispered impatiently after a moment.

"Baar is here with two or three of his men. He talks with Tao's men. They
talk about men from Twilight Country. Waiting for them now. Speak of
storm. Worried--because men do not come. Waiting for light-ray."

"They'll have a long wait," Mercer chuckled. "Let's get out of here,
Anina."

He must have made a slight noise, or perhaps he and Anina, crouching there
on the stairs, were seen by some one above. He never knew quite how it
occurred, but, without warning, a man stood at the opening, looking down
at them.

There was a shout, and the room above was in instant turmoil. Mercer lost
his head. Anina pulled at him and said something, but he did not hear her.
He only knew that they had been discovered, and that most of their enemies
in the Water City were crowded together in this one room at hand. And _he_
had the light-ray--the only one in the city.

A sudden madness possessed him. He tore away from Anina and, climbing up
the steps of the stairway, leaped into the room above.

Twenty or thirty men faced him, most of them about the table. Several had
started hastily to their feet; two or three chairs were overturned.

The man who had been looking down into the opening darted back as Mercer
came up, and shouted again.

Mercer saw it was Baar.


THE WATER CITY.

The men around the table were now all on their feet. One of them picked up
a huge metal goblet and flung it at Mercer's head. The last remaining bit
of reason Mercer had left fled from him. Without thought of what he was
about, he raised the metal cylinder; his thumb found the little button and
pressed it hard; he waved the cylinder back and forth before him.

It was over in an instant. Mercer relaxed his pressure on the button and
staggered back. He was sick and faint from what he had seen--with the
realization of what he had done. Flames were rising all about him. The
room was full of smoke. He held his breath, finding his way back somehow
to the stairway, with the agonized screams of the men ringing in his
ears. He caught a glimpse of Anina's white face as she stood there where
he had left her.

"Good God. Anina! Go back! Go back! I'm coming!"

He tripped near the top of the stairs and fell in a heap onto the platform
below, but he still held the cylinder clutched tightly in his hand.

Anina groped her way down to him. He gripped her by the arm. He was
trembling like a leaf. The crackling of the burning house above came down
to him; the cries of the men were stilled.

"Come, Anina," he half whispered. "Hurry--let's get away, anywhere.
Home--out of this cursed city."

Lua was still in the boat. Her calm, steady glance brought Mercer back to
his senses. They shoved the boat out from under the house, and in a moment
more were heading back through the city. The building they had left was
now a mass of flames, with a great cloud of smoke, rolling up from it. A
woman stood on the front platform an instant, and then, screaming, flung
herself into the water.

The city was in commotion. Faces appeared at windows; girls flew up and
gathered in a frightened flock, circling about the burning building; boats
miraculously appeared from everywhere. Lua was steering their boat on its
tortuous way between the houses. She put the boat nearly to full speed,
and as they swept past a house nearly collided with a punt that was
crossing behind it.

Mercer's nerves were still shaken. He handed Anina the light-ray cylinder.

"Here--take it, Anina. I don't want the cursed thing. Shoot it up into the
air. Somebody might try and stop us. That'll scare them. Careful you don't
hit anything!"

Anina played the light about in the air for a time, but soon there were so
many girls flying about she had to shut it off. A few minutes more and
they had passed the last of the houses, swept around the bend in the
river, and left the frightened city out of sight behind them.

They had left the river and, following close along shore, headed for the
bayous that led up to the Great City. The storm had now entirely passed,
leaving the daylight unusually bright and a fresh coolness in the air. The
sea was still rough, although not alarmingly so, and the boat made
comparatively slow progress. It was two hours or more--to Mercer it seemed
a whole day--before they were nearing the bayous. Anina was sitting by his
side in the center of the boat. Lua was steering.

"You hungry, Ollie?" the girl asked, smiling.

Mercer shook his head. He had forgotten they had intended to eat in the
Water City.

"I very hungry. Soon we--"

She stopped abruptly, staring up into the sky ahead of them.

Mercer followed her glance. A little black blob showed against the gray;
off to one side two other smaller black dots appeared.

"What's that?" cried Mercer, alarmed.

They watched a few moments in silence. Then Mercer took the cylinder, and
flashed its light into the air.

"If it's anybody connected with Tao, that'll show they'd better keep
away," he explained grimly.

Anina smiled. "Tao people cannot fly, Ollie."

A few moments more and they saw what it was. And within ten minutes they
had landed at the mouth of one of the bayous, and Miela and I were with
them.



CHAPTER XXV.


PREPARATIONS FOR WAR.


The months that followed were the busiest, I think, of my life. I began by
a complete reorganization of this government of which I found myself the
head. For the doddering old councilors of the late king I substituted men
whom I selected from among those of the city's prominent business men who
cared to serve.

The personnel of the police force I allowed to remain, for I soon saw they
were inclined to act very differently under me than under my predecessor.
The various other officials of this somewhat vague organization I
subjected to a thorough weeding out.

The net result was chaos for a time, but, far more quickly than I had
anticipated, I had things running again. I made no radical changes except
in personnel. I attempted to do nothing that was outside the then existing
laws, and no new laws were passed. But from the very first I made it clear
that I was not one to be trifled with.

Within a few days after I was put into power I interviewed Fuero and his
scientific confrres. I found them a body of grave men who represented the
highest type of the nation. They made it plain to me at once that they
would not concern themselves in any way with government affairs. Two years
before they had recognized Tao's menace, and had been preparing for it by
the manufacture of large quantities of war material which, in case of
extreme necessity, they would turn over to the government. This armament,
as Miela had told me, they guarded themselves, not trusting it even to
their workmen.

The scientific men, I understood now, were among the richest in the
nation, owing to the widespread use of their industrial appliances. It was
only a portion of this wealth that they were expending in the manufacture
of armament.

I demanded the release to me of this war material. I explained them my
plans, and told them in detail of Tao's visit to earth. They held several
conferences over a period of two or three days, but in the end I got what
I asked for.

So much for affairs in the Great City. I recognized during these days the
possibility of an armed invasion from the Twilight Country. I was better
prepared to meet it now, should it come, and I at once took steps to be
warned as far in advance as possible. To this end I had girls patrolling
the Narrow Sea, not only on our shore, but over in the Twilight Country as
well; and I was satisfied that if Tao made any move we would be notified
at once. Simultaneously with all this, we devoted ourselves to the
unification of the nation, for in very truth it seemed about to
disintegrate. Here it was that the girls were of the greatest assistance.

We organized them into an army which consisted of fifty squads of ten
girls each, with a leader for each squad. All of these girls were armed
with the light-ray cylinders. With this "flying army" Mercer and I made a
tour of the Light Country cities. We wasted no time with formalities, but
rounded up Tao's men wherever we could find them, and transported them
unceremoniously back to the Twilight Country shore.

In two or three of the cities--the Water City particularly--there was a
show of rebellion among the people; but our light-rays cowed them
instantly, and in no instance did we have to kill or injure any one.
Through Miela I made speeches everywhere. It was not my wish to hold the
country in sullen subjection, and to that end I appealed to their
patriotism in this coming war against Tao and the Twilight People. This
aspect of the matter met with ready response, and everywhere our meetings
ended in enthusiastic acclaim.

We started now to raise an army of young men, which we proposed to
transport across the Narrow Sea for land operations in the Twilight
Country. Before a week had passed I saw, by the response that came from my
various proclamations, that conscription would be unnecessary. With this
tangible evidence of the coming war the patriotism of the people grew by
leaps and bounds. The fact that the girls of the Great City were not only
in favor of it, but were actually already in service--a thing
unprecedented in the history of the nation--brought the sympathies of all
the women with us strongly.

Through the governors of each city I raised a separate army of young men,
officered by the older men, most of whom had taken part in past fighting.
Each of these little armies, as yet without arms, was drilled and held in
readiness for orders from the Great City.

I had, during all this time, selected as many able men as possible from
among the Great City's population, and given them over to Fuero and his
associates for training in the use of the light-ray rockets, the larger
projectors, protective measures against the ray, and many other appliances
which I understood only vaguely myself.

It was after our return from the tour of the different cities, and before
the recruiting of the young men was fairly under way, when like a
bombshell came the news from our flying patrol that a fleet of armed boats
was coming down the river from the Lone City. The attack from Tao was at
hand, and our preparations were still far from complete. We had our army
of girls in active operation, and that was all. Tao's boats would reach
the Light Country shore in a few hours. There was no time for anything but
the hastiest of preparations. We decided then to call the army of girls
and meet the boats in the Narrow Sea, turning them back if possible.

I have now to explain the method of defense against the light-ray. In
theory I only vaguely understood it. In practice it was simple and, like
most defenses, only partially effective.

Bob Trevor, has already mentioned it--the suits of black cloth he saw in
the Mercutian camp in Wyoming. It was not, as he had afterward supposed, a
dye for fabrics. Instead, it was the thread of a worm--like our silk
worm--which in its natural state was black and was impervious to the ray.
By that I mean a substance whose molecules increased their vibration rate
only slightly from a brief contact with the ray.

It was only partly efficacious, for after an exposure of a minute or more
the intense heat of the ray was communicated. It then became partly
penetrable, and anything close behind it would be destroyed.

We had under manufacture at this time a number of protective devices by
which this substance might be used. Boats had, in the past, been equipped
with a sort of shield or hood in front, making them more or less
impervious to a direct horizontal beam of the light.

Tao's boats which now threatened us were so protected, I was informed by
the girls who reported them. Recognizing the probability of an attack by
us from the air, they also had a covering of the cloth, like a canopy
above them. But as may be readily understood, such protection could be
made only partly effective.

I had already manufactured, at Miela's suggestion, a number of shields for
our girls to carry while in flight. These consisted of the fabric in very
light, almost diaphanous, form, hung upon a flexible frame of very thin
strips of bamboo. It was some twelve feet broad across the top, narrowing
rapidly into a long fluttering tail like a kite.

There was nothing rigid about this shield. Its two or three bamboo ribs
were as flexible as a whip, with the veiling--it was hardly more than
that--fluttering below them almost entirely unsupported. In weight, the
whole approximated one-twelfth that of a girl, not at all a difficult
amount to carry.

Within two hours after the report came--it was near midday--we were ready
to start from the Great City to repel Tao's attack. Our forces consisted
of some six hundred girls, each armed with a light-ray cylinder and a
shield. This was the organization I have already mentioned, fifty squads
of ten, each with a leader; and fifty other girls, the most daring and
expert in the air, who were to act independently.

We had two platforms, protected by the fabric, and with a sort of canopy
around the sides underneath, over which the girls grasping the handles
could fly. Mercer and Anina rode on one platform, and Miela and I on the
other. All of us were dressed in the black garments.

On each of the platforms we had mounted a projector of higher power than
the hand cylinders, although of course of much less effective range than
those the Mercutians had used in Wyoming.

Thus equipped we rose into the air from the castle grounds in the Great
City, with a silent, awed multitude watching us--as strange an army,
probably, as ever went forth to battle.



CHAPTER XXVI.


THE BATTLE.


We swept out over the Great City, flying in the battle-formation we had
used many times before on our trips about the country. Mercer's platform
and mine were some fifty feet apart, leading. Behind us, in a great
semicircle, the girls spread out, fifty little groups of ten, each with
its single leader in front. Below, a hundred feet perhaps, the fifty other
girls darted back and forth, keeping pace with us. The aspect of these
girls, flying thus to battle, was truly extraordinary. The pink-white
flesh of their bodies; their limbs incased in the black veiling; their
long black or golden hair; and the vivid red or blue feathered wings
flashing behind those wide, fluttering, flimsy black shields--it was a
sight the like of which I never shall see again.

There was almost no wind, for which I was thankful, as it made our
maneuvers in the air considerably less difficult. When we reached the
Narrow Sea our patrols reported that Tao's ships were still in the river,
waiting for others from the Lone City to join them. We hastened on, for I
wished to meet them as near the Twilight shore as possible.

We believed, from the reports our girls had brought us, that the enemy
would have some twenty or thirty boats, most of them similar to that in
which Mercer and Anina weathered the storm on the way to the Water City.

We assumed that the men in the boats would be armed with the hand
light-ray cylinders. These projected a beam not over four inches broad and
had an effective range of about five hundred feet. The boats probably
would carry large projectors also. They might be set up in the boats ready
for use, or they might not.

What range they would have we could not estimate, though we hoped we
should encounter nothing more powerful than this one Miela and I had on
the platform. Its beam was about twenty inches wide, its effective radius
something like a thousand feet.

We did not expect to encounter the very large projectors. We had some in
the Great City with a range of something like ten miles, and others of
lesser range that spread the ray out fan shape. But these were extremely
heavy, and we were confident it would not be practical to mount them in
the boats.

We sighted the enemy in the Narrow Sea just before the Twilight shore was
reached. The first intimation we had was the sight of one of the narrow
beams of red-green light flashing about in the twilight. As we crept
closer, at an altitude of some two thousand feet, we saw the dim outlines
of the boats in the water below.

There were, I made out, some ten or fifteen in sight. They were heading
out into the sea in single file. Miela and I had carefully discussed the
tactics we were to employ. Mercer understood our plans, and we had three
or four girls detailed to fly close to the platforms and carry our orders
about to the leaders of the various little squads.

We sighted the boats when we were about a mile away, and, as I have said,
at an altitude of some two thousand feet. They must have seen us soon
afterward, for many light-rays now began flashing up from them.

So far as I could determine, each boat seemed armed only with one mounted
projector; these I believed to be of somewhat similar power to our own.
Our first move was to poise directly over the enemy, rising to an altitude
of twenty-five hundred feet. The boats kept straight on their way, and we
followed them, circling overhead in lengthening spirals, but keeping well
out of range.

I had ordered that none of the rays be flashed at this time, and it must
have been difficult for the men in the boats below to see us in the dusk,
shrouded as we were in black. They sent up a rocket once; it mounted above
us in a slow flaming arc, hung poised an instant, and then descended,
plunging into the sea a mile or so away. We heard distinctly the hiss of
its contact with the water, and saw, like a quickly dissipating mist, the
cloud of steam that arose.

We were not armed with these rockets, for to discharge them from the
platforms would have been impractical. But we did not fear them being used
against us. Even if true aim had been possible, we could easily avoid
their slow flight.

The protecting canopy below the sides of our platform made it difficult to
see what was going on below us. Miela and I lay prone, with our heads
projecting over its forward end. In this position we had an unobstructed,
though somewhat limited, view. The girls carrying us could see nothing.
They were guided by watching the other girls flying near them, and by
Miela's constant directions.

For some ten or fifteen minutes we circled about over the leading boat.
The Twilight shore was now almost over the horizon. The boats showed as
little black patches on the gray-black of the sea, but the lights flashing
up from them were plainly visible.

The boat that led the line was quite perceptibly drawing away from the
others. Already it was a thousand feet or more ahead of the nearest one
following. We waited through another period. This leading boat was now
beyond range of the others, and, being isolated, I decided to attack it.

"Miela," I said, "tell them all to maintain this level. You and I will go
down at that first boat. Have them all remain up here. Tell Mercer if
anything goes wrong with us to act as he thinks best."

We waited while these commands were circulated about. Mercer's platform
swept close over us, and he shouted: "We _won't_ stay up here."

I persuaded him finally, and then we directed our girls to circle slowly
downward with our platform. I ordered a slow descent, for I was in no mind
to rush blindly into range of their ray.

We drooped down in a spiral, until at about fifteen hundred feet I ordered
the girls to descend no farther. So far as I could make out now, this boat
was protected from above by a broad overhanging canopy. Its sides
evidently were open, or nearly so, for we could see now the smaller rays
flashing out horizontally.

The large projector was mounted in the bow beyond the canopy. Its beam
obviously could be directed into the air, for it was now swinging up
toward us. But in the horizontal position its range was limited to an arc
in front of the boat. I saw then that our play was to attack from a low
level, since only in that way could we expect to reach a vulnerable spot
in the boat's armor. And I believed that if we could keep behind it they
could not reach us with their larger projector.

We swooped downward almost to the water level, and reached it a thousand
feet perhaps off to one side of the boat and partly behind it. The smaller
projectors flashed out at us, but we were beyond their range. The
projector in the bow swung back and forth, and as we skimmed the surface
of the water, heading toward the boat, it turned to face us.

What followed happened so quickly I had no time to consult with Miela. She
directed our flight. I turned the current into our projector and tried to
bring its beam to bear on the boat. We approached within some eight
hundred feet of it, darting back and forth, sometimes rising a hundred
feet or more, sometimes skimming the surface, but always keeping behind
the boat as it turned in an endeavor to face us.

My light-ray beam hit the water frequently, with a great boiling and
hissing, sending up clouds of steam that for a moment obscured the scene.
Once or twice our opponent's beam flashed over us, but we were beyond its
arc before they could bring it directly to bear.

I grew confused at the rapid turns we made. The dark outlines of the boat,
with its twenty or thirty flashing red and green lights, seemed everywhere
at once. I swung my projector about as best I could, but the swiftly
shifting target seemed too elusive. Once, as we dropped suddenly downward,
I thought we should plunge into the hissing, roaring water below. Again,
the opposing ray swung directly under us, as we darted upward to avoid it.

"I can't make it, Miela," I said. "Hold steady toward them if you can."

She did not answer, but kept her face over the platform's end and issued
her swift directions to the girls. Once, as we tilted sharply upward, I
caught a glimpse of a black-shape sweeping past, overhead. It was Mercer's
platform, flying unswervingly toward the boat, its red-green beam steady
before it like a locomotive headlight. We turned to follow; my own light
swung dangerously near Mercer, and I turned the current off hastily.

The wind of our forward flight whistled past my ears; Miela's directions
to the girls rose shrill above it. I caught a glimpse of the darting
lights of the boat ahead. Then, when we were hardly more than six hundred
feet away, Mercer's light picked it up. I saw the little lurid red circle
it made as it struck the boat's canopy top, and roved along it end to end.
Mercer's platform darted lower, and from that angle his light swept under
the canopy. A man's scream of agony came to us across the water. The
lights on the boat were extinguished; only the yellow glare of the flames
rising from its interior fittings remained.

Then, a moment later, the boat's stern rose into the air, and it slid
hissing into the water, leaving only a little wreckage and a few
struggling forms on the swirling surface.

We swung sharply upward. Again Mercer's platform--its light now
extinguished--swept directly over us. His exultant voice floated down.

"We did it, Alan! We did it! Come on up!"

We rose to the upper air, where the girls were still circling about. The
other boats were keeping on their course, spreading farther apart now to
be out of range of each other's projectors. I had hoped they would turn
back with this catastrophe to their leader, but they did not.

I consulted hastily with Miela, and then we gave the order for a general
attack, allowing each of the leading girls to act as she saw fit.

Like a great flock of birds we swooped downward upon our prey, spreading
out to attack all the boats at once. The girls now turned on their hand
lights--a myriad tiny beams darting about in the semidarkness.

I cannot attempt to describe the scene that followed. It can be imagined,
perhaps, but not told in words. As we swept within range of the lights
that swung up from below to meet us, I saw a girl, flying alone, pass
directly through one of the red beams. It seemed to strike her sidewise.
In an instant she had passed beyond it. I saw the dim outlines of her form
as she fluttered onward, wavering and aimless like a wounded bird. And
then she fell, turning over and over as with one wing she strove vainly to
support herself, until at last, wrapped in the sable shroud of her shield,
she plunged with a great splash into the sea.

The flashing light-rays all about us now seemed mingled in inextricable
confusion. The girls must have passed through them frequently, protected
by their shields; and I know our platform was several times struck by them
from below. The absence of sound was uncanny. Only the whistling wind of
our flight, the flapping of the girl's wings, and the hissing of steam as
our rays struck the water, accompanied this inferno of light.

We swept beyond the boat we had singled out, passing five or six hundred
feet above it, and in the effort to avoid its ray turning so that I was
unable to bring mine upon it. As we rose again, beyond it, I saw a boat
off to the left in flames. A dozen girls had rushed upon it, darting in
among its smaller rays to where their own would be effective. But there
was only one girl above it now, struggling brokenly to maintain herself in
flight. The boat sank with the roar of an explosion of some kind, but in
the sudden darkness about I could still see this lone wounded girl
fluttering onward.

We were not far away; I pointed her out to Miela, and instead of swinging
back we kept on toward her. We contrived to pass close under her, and she
fell abruptly almost into my arms. I stretched her out gently on the
platform and turned back to Miela, who was kneeling behind our projector.

We were now nearly half a mile from the nearest of the boats. Several of
them evidently had been sunk, and two or three others were sinking. One I
could make out heading back for the Twilight shore; above it the lights of
our girls following showed vivid against the dark-gray sky. Where Mercer's
platform was I could not tell.

Miela gripped my shoulder.

"See, Alan--there!" She pointed off to one side. "One of the boats tries
to escape."

We were now some five hundred feet above the water. Half a mile beyond us,
all its lights out, one of the boats was scurrying away, on across toward
the Light Country. For some reason none of our girls seemed following it.

Miela issued a sharp command; we swooped downward at lightning speed and,
barely skimming the surface, flew after this escaping enemy. Whether its
larger projector had been rendered inoperative, or many of its crew
killed, or whether it thought merely to escape us and make a landing in
the Light Country, I did not know.

Whatever the reason, no lights showed from this boat as we drew after it.
I had our own light out. When we came close within range I flashed it on
suddenly. We were flying steadily, and I picked up the boat without
difficulty, raking it through from stern to stem under its protecting
canopy. I could see the canopy drop as its supporting metal framework
fused in the heat of the ray; flames rose from the interior wooden
fittings; the boat's stern seemed to melt away as the thin metal was
rendered molten; the water about it boiled under the heat. A cloud of
steam then rose up, obscuring it completely from my sight.

I switched off the light. We continued on, rising a little. The steam
dissipated. Directly below us on the bubbling, swirling water a few
twisted black forms bobbed about. We were so close now I could see them
plainly. I looked away hastily.

We swung back toward the Twilight shore, rising sharply. There seemed now
only one boat afloat. Far above it I saw a tiny black oblong that I knew
was Mercer's platform. A swarm of other dots, with the tiny pencils of red
light flashing from them, showed where the cloud of girls were swooping
down to the attack. Now that we were out of the action, I had opportunity
to watch what was going on more closely.

This last engagement seemed to last less than a minute. The girls darted
fearlessly downward among the rays that swung up from the boat. Scores of
them were hit; I could see their forms illuminated for an instant by the
lurid red and green light. Some passed through it safely; many fell. But
those who got within range hit the boat without difficulty. Its lights
went out suddenly and a moment later it sank. The girls' lights flashed
off, and they rose again into the air--tiny black shapes circling about
Mercer's platform.

The scene now seemed suddenly very dark, peaceful and still. A great
weight lifted from my heart, though it still remained heavy with what I
had seen. I turned to Miela; her face was white and drawn.

"We have won, my girl," I said.

She smiled wanly.

"We have won. But, oh, Alan, that women should have to do such deeds!"

Her eyes shone with the light of a soul in sorrow.

"Pray to your God now, my husband, that this war may be the last, for all
time, in all the universe."



CHAPTER XXVII.


THE SIEGE OF THE LONE CITY.


Our losses totaled nearly a hundred and fifty girls. We brought back with
us on the platforms but six wounded. I shall never forget that hour we
spent searching among the wreckage--those blackened, twisted forms of what
had once been men and women. I shall not describe it.

Of all the boats which Tao had dispatched on this ill-fated expedition,
only one escaped to return with news of the disaster. I was glad now that
one, at least, had survived, for the report it would give would, I felt
sure, dissuade Tao from making any other similar attempt at invasion.

Our broken little army made its way slowly back to the Great City. We
went, not in triumph, but indeed with all the aspect of defeat. The people
received us in a frenzy of joy and gratitude to the girls for what they
had done.

This first battle took place, as I have said, just after we four had
returned from our tour of the Light Country, and before the recruiting of
the young men was fairly under way. To this recruiting it proved an
extraordinary stimulus. The girls, having been in successful action,
stirred the young men of the nation as probably nothing else could, and
all over the country they came forward faster than they could be enrolled.

It was two or three days after the battle that Miela came to me one
morning with the wounded girl she and I had rescued in the air.

"We have a plan--Sela and I--my husband," she said.

The girl seemed hardly more than a sweet little child--fifteen or sixteen,
perhaps. It gave me a shock now to realize that we had allowed her to go
into such a combat. One of her blue-feathered wings was bound in a cloth.
Its lower portion, I could tell, had been burned away.

"Never will she fly again, my husband," said Miela, "for she is one of
those who has sacrificed her wings that we might all be safe from the
invader."

She then went on to explain that now, while this feeling of gratitude to
the girls ran so high among the people, the time seemed propitious for
changing the long-hated law regarding their wings. I had not thought of
that, but agreed with her wholly.

I called the people into the castle gardens that same night. Never had I
seen such a gathering. We allowed fully ten thousand to come in; the rest
we were forced to send away.

Miela made a speech, telling them that in recognition of the girls'
services in this war, I had decided to allow them henceforth to keep their
wings unmutilated after marriage. We exhibited this little girl, Sela, as
one who had given her power of flight, not as a sacrifice on the altar of
man's selfishness, but in the service of her country. Then Sela herself
made a speech, in her earnest little child voice, pleading for her
sisters.

When she ended there may have been some unmarried men in our audience who
were still against the measure--doubtless there were--but they were afraid
or ashamed to let their feeling be known. When the meeting broke up I had
ample evidence of the people's wishes upon which to proceed.

Within a week my congress met, and the law was repealed. We informed the
other cities of this action, and everywhere it was met with enthusiasm.

Enlistment and war preparations went steadily on, but despite it all there
were more marriages that next month--three times over--than in any before.
I had now been in power some three months, and the time was approaching
when we were ready to make our invasion of the Twilight Country. We had
been maintaining a rigid arial patrol of the Narrow Sea, but no further
activities of the enemy had been threatened.

The expedition, when it was ready, numbered about a thousand young men,
each armed with one of the hand light-ray cylinders; fifty officers, and
about fifty older men in charge of the projectors and rockets, who, for
want of a better term, I might call our artillery corps. There was also
the organization of girls, and a miscellaneous corps of men to handle the
boats, mechanics to set up the projectors, and a commissariat.

The thousand young men represented those we had selected from the several
thousand enlisted in the Great City. All the rest, and the many thousands
in the other cities, we were holding in reserve.

We took with us, on this invading expedition, only small-wheeled trucks,
on which to convey the larger projectors, and storage tanks and other
heavy apparatus, for the Lone City river ran directly to the point where
we planned to conduct our siege.

Some forty large boats were required to carry the men, ammunition and
supplies. Mercer and I, with Anina and Miela, traveled as before through
the air on the two platforms with the girls. We crossed the Narrow Sea
without incident and entered the river.

Several hours up, the river narrowed and entered a rocky gorge, four or
five hundred feet wide and a thousand feet deep, with almost perpendicular
sides. Along one of these ran the Lone City trail. We passed through this
gorge. The river here flowed with a current that amounted almost to
rapids. Our boats made slow progress. Finally we emerged into an even
wilder country, almost devoid of trees. Here we made our first night's
encampment.

Noon of the next day found us approaching the Lone City. We did not need
to surmise now that Tao would be warned, for far away on the horizon ahead
we saw the beams from his great projectors mounting up into the blackness
of the sky. Some four miles from the Lone City the river we were ascending
swept off to the right. This was its closest point to the city, and here
we disembarked. There were several docks and a few houses, but we found
them all deserted.

The Lone City was particularly well suited to defense, even though the lay
of the country was such that we were enabled to approach here within four
miles, and establish our base in comparative safety. The country was wild
and rocky, with few trees. The river bed lay in a caon. From where we
landed, a valley so deep and narrow, it might almost be termed a caon,
also led up to the city.

This valley was some two miles wide, with a level floor, and precipitous,
rocky sides towering in many places over a thousand feet. Above it
stretched a broken plateau country. The valley had many sharp bends and
turns, as though in some distant past it had been the bed of a great river
that had eroded its tortuous course through the rock.

The Lone City lay shut in at the bottom of this valley between two of its
bends. It was a settlement of perhaps ten thousand people, the only city
in the Twilight Country, with one exception, on this hemisphere of
Mercury.

We established our field base here at the river, and I devoted the next
few days to informing myself of the exact lay of the country, and the
methods of defense of the city Tao had provided.

I found this defense the height of simplicity, and for its purpose as
effective as it well could be. A vertical barrage of light surrounded the
city, extending upward into the air with the most powerful projectors some
ten or fifteen miles, and, with those of the spreading rays, forming a
solid wall of light at the lower altitudes. There were no projectors past
the first turn in the valley toward the river--where they could have been
directed horizontally--and none of them on the cliff tops above the city.
Thus, although we could not get over this light-barrage, we could approach
it closely in many places.

Tao's tactics became immediately evident. He had thrown an almost
impregnable barrier close about him and, trusting to its protection, was
making no effort to combat us for the moment with any moves of offense.

My first endeavor was to find a position on top of the cliffs from which
the city could be reached with a projector. It was practically the only
thing to do. The city could not be approached in front from the valley
floor; its entire surface beyond the turn was swept by the light-rays.
Approach from below in the rear was likewise barred.

Had the barrage been not so high our girls might have flown over it and
dropped bombs, or we might have sent rockets over it and dropped them into
the city. Neither of these projects was practical. The girls could not fly
over that barrage. It was too cold in the higher altitudes. Nor could we
send rockets over, for rockets sent through the light were exploded before
they could reach their mark.

The projectors along the sides of the city were located for the most part
a hundred feet or more back from the base of the surrounding cliffs. This
allowed them to cut the cliff face at the top. It will be understood then
that we could approach the brink of the cliff in many places, but never
sufficiently near to be able to direct our rays downward into the city.

These cliffs were exceedingly jagged and broken. They overhung in many
places. Great rifts split them; ravines wound their way down, many of
these with small, stunted trees growing in them. A descent from the summit
to the floor of the valley, had we been unimpeded by the light, would in
many places not have been difficult.

During the next week, we succeeded--working in the prevailing gloom--in
establishing a projector at the mouth of a ravine which emerged at the
cliff face hardly a hundred feet from the valley bottom. This point was
below the spreading light-rays which swept the cliff top above. We mounted
the projector without discovery, and, flashing it on suddenly, swept the
valley with its rays. An opposing ray from below picked it out almost
immediately, and destroyed it, killing two of our men.

The irregularities of the cliffs made several other similar attempts
possible. We took advantage of them, and in each case were able to rake
the valley with our fire for a moment before our projector was located and
destroyed. One, which we were at great pains to protect, was maintained
for a somewhat longer period.

I believed we had done an immense amount of damage by these momentarily
active projectors, although our enemy gave no sign.

We then tried dropping rockets at the base of the lights in the valley.
There were few points at which they could be reached without striking the
rays first. But we persisted, sending up a hundred or more. Most were
ineffective; a few found their mark, as we could tell by a sudden "hole"
in the barrage, which, however, was invariably repaired before we could
make it larger.

These activities lasted a week or more. It began, to look as though we had
entered upon a lengthy siege. I wondered how long the city's food supply
would last if we settled down to starve it out. The thought came to me
then that Tao might be almost ready for his second expedition to the
earth. Was he indeed merely standing us off in this way so that some day
he might depart in his vehicle before our very eyes?

Tao began to adopt our tactics. Without warning one day a projector from a
towering eminence near the city flashed down at the river encampment. That
we were not entirely destroyed was due to the extreme watchfulness of our
guards, who located it immediately with their rays. As it was, we lost
nearly a hundred men in the single moment it was in operation.

We then withdrew our camp farther away down the river, to a point where
the conformation of the country made a repetition of this attack
impossible. A sort of guerrilla warfare now began in the mountains. Our
scouting parties frequently met Tao's men, and many encounters, swiftly
fatal to one side or the other, took place. But all the time we were able,
at intervals, to rake the valley with our fire for brief periods.

Mercer constantly was evolving plans of the utmost daring, most of them
indeed amounting practically to suicide for those undertaking them. But I
held him back. Our present tactics were dangerous enough, although after
the first few fatalities we succeeded in protecting our men, even though
our projectors were invariably destroyed.

One of Mercer's plans we tried with some success. There were some places
in the light-barrage that were much less high than others. We devised a
smaller rocket that could be fired from the platforms. Mercer took it up
some twenty thousand feet, and sent several rockets over the light, which
we hoped dropped into the city.

A month went by in this way. We were in constant communication by water
with the Great City, receiving supplies and renforcements of men and
armament. And then gradually the situation changed. Over a period of
several days our hand-to-hand encounters with the enemy grew less
frequent. Finally two or three days went by without one of them taking
place.

We became bolder and prepared to establish several projectors at different
points for simultaneous fire at a given signal. The light-barrage in the
valley remained unchanged, although now its beams held steady instead of
sometimes swinging to and fro. We dislodged one of its projectors with a
rocket, making a hole in the barrage, which this time was not repaired.
And then, to our amazement, the lights one by one began to die away. We
ceased operations, waiting. Within half a day they had all vanished, like
lights which had flickered and burned out.

Mercer, unthinking, was all for an instant attack. We could indeed have
swept the valley now without difficulty; but there were thousands of
people in the city--non-combatants, women and children--and to murder them
to no purpose was not the sort of warfare we cared to make.

It seemed probable that Tao had evacuated his position. The valley beyond
the city led up into the mountains toward the Dark City, almost on the
borderland of the frozen wastes of the Dark Country. Tao had protected
this valley from behind so that we had been unable to penetrate it without
making a detour of over twenty miles. This I had not done, although had
the siege lasted longer I think with our next renforcement we should have
attempted it.

With the extinguishing of the lights our long-range activities ceased. We
anticipated some trick, and for several days remained quiet. Our girls
could have flown over the city; but this I would not allow, fearing that a
ray would bring them suddenly down.

Miela and myself, occupying one of the stone houses down by the river,
held a consultation there with Mercer and Anina.

Mercer, as usual, was for instant action.

"We might as well march right in," he declared. "They're out of business,
or they've gone--one or the other."

"To the Dark City they have gone, I think," Anina said.

"I think so, too," Mercer agreed.

"_I'll_ go in alone on foot," I said, "and find out what has happened."

But Miela shook her head.

"One who can fly will go more safely. I shall go."

"Not you, my sister," Anina said quietly. "Warfare is not for you--now.
That you can understand, can you not? _I_ shall go."

Mercer insisted on accompanying her; and he did, part of the way, waiting
while she flew close over the city. It was several hours before they
returned, reporting that the place was almost in ruins, and that Tao and
his men had fled some time before, leaving the light-barrage to burn
itself out. The next day, with our men in the black cloth suits of armor
marching up the valley, and the girls with their black shields flying
overhead, we took possession of all that remained of the Lone City.



CHAPTER XXVIII.


THE END OF TAO.


The scene of desolation that met us in the Lone City was at once
extraordinary and awesome. It seemed impossible that our rays, acting for
so brief a period, could have done so much damage. The city was nothing
more than a semicivilized settlement of little, flat-topped stone houses.
Our rays, striking these, had discharged harmlessly into the ground. But
the interiors had been penetrated through windows and doors, and
everything inflammable about them, as well as about the streets, had been
destroyed.

The people had taken refuge in cellars underground and in caves and
crevices--wherever they could find shelter. But even so, there were a
thousand dead in that city that morning, and rapidly spreading disease
would shortly have killed them all. They came out of their hiding places
little by little as we entered the streets, and stood about in groups
staring at us sullenly. They seemed mostly old men and women and children,
the younger men having fled with Tao's army. They were heavy-set, pathetic
people, with broad, heavy faces, pasty-white skin, and large protruding
eyes. We were in the Lone City nearly a month, burying the dead, doing
what we could for the people, and destroying or removing the apparatus Tao
had left behind him.

The Lone City, before the banishment of Tao, had been one of the most
primitive settlements of the Twilight region. It was in the other
hemisphere that the Twilight Country was more densely populated; but since
this Lone City was so close to the Great City it had become the scene of
Tao's exile.

This region about the Lone City was of the most barren of the whole
Twilight country. Its people were almost entirely meat eaters. Back toward
the Dark Country great bands of animals like caribou roamed. Living almost
entirely in darkness, they had little power of sight, and were easy prey
to hunters.

Their hides, which were covered with short, white fur, provided clothing;
a form of candle was made from their fat, and used for lighting; and their
flesh provided food. The Dark City, some two hundred and fifty miles away,
was the center from which most of these animals were obtained.

"Then, that's where Tao has been getting his supplies from," Mercer
exclaimed, as we heard all this from one of the Twilight People. "And
that's where he has gone now."

Tao had indeed withdrawn to the Dark City, we learned positively. And more
than that, we learned that he had factories there as well as here. We
found in the Lone City some eight of the interplanetary vehicles--most of
them almost entirely completed. The fact that Tao had abandoned them so
readily made us believe he had others in the Dark City.

There seemed a curious lack of appliances for protection against the ray.
This we attributed to two causes--that Tao had managed to take most of
them with him, and that his supply of fabric came from distant cities on
the other side of the globe. Within a month after we had occupied the Lone
City we were again ready to start forward. It had been an irksome month
for Mercer, and not a day had passed without my receiving a truculent
declaration from him that we were fools to allow Tao to escape so easily.

Our occupation of the Lone City was to continue. On this second expedition
farther into the Twilight Country I took with me a much smaller and more
select force. We had before us a land journey of some two hundred and
fifty miles, through an unknown, barren country, in which it would be
difficult for us to maintain ourselves, so I was determined to be burdened
with as few men as possible.

Our force consisted of all the older men trained in the operation of the
larger projectors and rockets; a variety of mechanics and helpers, men
selected for their physical strength; a corps of young men to the number
of fifty, and fifty girls.

We did not take the platforms, for I assumed it would be too cold for the
girls to make sustained flights. Against this cold we provided ourselves
well with the white furry garments of the Twilight People. I need not go
into details of our march to the Dark City. It occupied some three weeks.
We met with no opposition, passing a few isolated settlements, whose
inhabitants rather welcomed us than otherwise.

This region we passed through took us almost to the ill-defined borders of
the Dark Country. It was not mountainous, but rather more a great broken
plateau with a steady ascent. Each day it grew darker and colder, until at
last we entered perpetual night. It was not the sort of night we know on
earth, but a Stygian blackness.

We used little torches now, of the light-ray current, and our little army,
trudging along in their lurid glare, and dragging its wagons piled high
with the projectors, presented a curious and weird picture. The country
for the most part was barren rock, with a few stunted trees growing in the
ravines and crevices. There was an abundance of water.

We encountered several rainstorms, and once during the last week it snowed
a little. Except for the storms, the wind held steady, a gentle breeze
from the colder regions in front blowing back toward the Light Country
behind us.

During the latter days of our journey I noticed a curious change in the
ground. It seemed now, in many places, to be like a soft, chalky
limestone, which ran in pockets and seams between strata of very hard
rock. I called Miela's attention to it once, and she pointed out a number
of irregular shaped, small masses of a substance which in daylight I
assumed might be yellow. These were embedded in the soft limestone.

"Sulphur," she said. "Like that on your earth. There is much of it up
here, I have heard."

The Dark City occupied a flat plateau, slightly elevated above the
surrounding country, and on the brink of a sheer drop of some six or seven
thousand feet to an arm of the polar sea.

Our problems now were very different from when we had laid siege to the
Lone City. The conformation of the country allowed us no opportunity to
approach closer than two or three miles to the barrage of light we must
expect. We could not reach the city from these nearest points with our
projectors.

There were many lateral ravines depressed below the upper surface of the
main plateau, and though the light-rays from the city, directed
horizontally, would sweep their tops, we found we could traverse many of
them a considerable distance in safety. But from the bottoms of them we
could only fire our rockets without specific aim and our projectors not at
all.

Only by the most fortuitous of circumstances did we escape complete
annihilation the first moment we appeared within range. We had no idea
what lay ahead--although the guides we had brought with us from the Lone
City informed us we were nearing our destination--and the scene remained
in complete darkness until we were hardly more than five miles outside
Tao's stronghold.

Then, without warning, his lights flashed on--not only a vertical barrage,
but a horizontal one as well--sweeping the higher points of the entire
country around for a distance of twelve or fifteen miles.

We were, at the moment, following the bottom of a narrow gully. Had we
been on any of the upper reaches of the plateau we would undoubtedly have
been picked out by one of the roving beams of light and destroyed.

We camped where we were, and again for several days I attempted nothing,
devoting myself to a thorough exploration of the country about us. The
Dark City appeared impregnable. Beams of light from Tao's larger
projectors were constantly roaming about the entire plateau that
surrounded it, and every higher point of vantage from which one of ours
could have reached them must have been struck by their rays a score of
times a day.

It will be understood, of course, that any place where we could mount one
of the higher powered projectors, a task of several hours at best, and
strike the city, must of necessity be also within range of their rays, for
theirs were as powerful as ours. Upon observation I felt convinced that
should we attempt to mount a projector anywhere on these higher points it
would be sought out and destroyed long before we could bring it into
action.

That this was Tao's stronghold, and not the Lone City, now became evident.
I could readily understand why he had retreated here. Fully four times as
many projectors as he had in operation in the Lone City were now in
evidence. Those of shorter range, and spreading rays, kept the entire
country bathed in steady light for several miles around him, while the
larger ones--a hundred of them possibly--roved constantly over the black
emptiness beyond.

From our encampment we could advance but little farther. Fortunately,
retreat was open to us; and once beyond the circle of steady light, we had
no difficulty in moving about in the darkness, even though momentarily we
frequently were within range of the single light-beams, had they chanced
to swing upon us.

This was the situation which, even Mercer agreed, appeared hopeless. We
explored the brink of the precipice below which lay the sea. It was a
sheer drop of many thousand feet. Although a descent might have been made
closer to the Dark City, certainly it was not possible at any point we
could reach. We sent our girls down, and they reported that from below it
appeared probable that access to the ocean was had by the Dark City some
miles farther along. They went but a short distance, for Tao's lights were
occasionally sweeping about; and more than that, they could make but very
short flights, owing to the cold.

To starve Tao out appeared equally as impractical as a direct attack. With
our little army we could not surround the city on a circumference of some
eighty miles. We might, indeed, have barred the several roads that entered
it, but it seemed probable that if Tao wanted to come out he would come,
for all we could do to stop him. And yet to starve him out seemed our only
possible plan.

"We'll have to send back for renforcements," I told Mercer, Miela and
Anina at one of our many conferences. "An army of several thousand, if we
can maintain it up here."

And then, the very next day, Mercer and Anina came forward with their
discovery. We had set up our encampment of little black fabric tents in a
ravine some six miles outside the city, securely hidden by surrounding
cliffs. Above us across the black sky the greenish-red beams of Tao's
light-rays swept continually to and fro. Miela and I were sitting together
disconsolately in our tent, reviewing the situation, when Mercer and Anina
burst in. They had been roaming about together, exploring the country, and
came in now full of excitement and enthusiasm to tell us what they had
found. We two were to accompany them. They would tell us no more than
that; and as soon as we had all eaten we started off. It would be a trip
of several hours, Mercer said, and would take us around to the other side
and partly behind the Dark City.

We followed no road, but scrambled along over the open country, picking
our way as best we could, and using the lights from the city to give us
direction. The two girls half walked, half flew, and Mercer and I, with
our ability to take huge leaps, made rapid progress.

The night was black--that unluminous blackness that seems to swallow
everything, even objects near at hand. We made our way along, using little
hand searchlights that threw a red glare a short distance before us.

We kept down in the gulleys as much as possible, avoiding the higher
places where Tao's long-range beams were constantly striking, and passed
around in front of the Dark City, keeping always at least five miles away.

We had been traveling two or three hours, and still Mercer and Anina gave
us no clew to what we were about to see. It began to snow. Huge, soft
flakes soon lay thick on the ground.

"Mercer, where are you taking us?" I exclaimed once.

"You shall see very soon now," Anina answered me. "What we have found,
Ollie and I--and our plan--you shall understand it soon."

We had to be content with that. An hour later we found ourselves well
around behind the Dark City and hardly more than four miles outside it. A
great jagged cliff-face, two hundred feet high perhaps, fronted us. We, at
its base, were on comparatively low ground here, with another low line of
cliffs shading us from the light-beams of the city.

Mercer and Anina stopped and pointed upward at the cliff. A huge seam of
the soft, chalky limestone ran laterally for five hundred feet or more
across its face. I saw embedded in this seam great irregular masses of
sulphur.

"There you are," said Mercer triumphantly. "Sulphur--stacks of it. All we
have to do is set fire to it. With the wind blowing this way--right toward
the city--" His gesture was significant.

The feasibility of the plan struck us at once. It was an enormous deposit
of free sulphur. From this point the prevailing wind blew directly across
the city. The sulphur lay in great masses sufficiently close together so
that if we were to set fire to it in several places with our small
light-ray torches we could be assured of its burning steadily. And its
fumes, without warning, blowing directly over the city--I shuddered as the
whole thing became clear to me.

"Good God, man--"

"That'll smoke 'em out," declared Mercer, waving his hand again toward the
cliff. "I ask you now, won't that smoke 'em out?"

"Tao's men--yes." Miela's face was grave as she answered Mercer's
triumphant question. "It will do that, Ollie. Kill them all, of a
certainty; but that whole city there--"

Mercer stared at his feet, toying idly with the little torch in his hand.

"Can you think of any other way to get at Tao?" he asked.

Anina met my eyes steadily.

"There is no other way," she said quietly. "It must be done. It is your
world--your people--we must think of now. And you know there is no other
way."

We decided at last to try it. Once we had made the decision, we proceeded
as quickly as possible to put the plan into execution. We moved our
encampment farther away, well out of danger from the fumes.

We mounted several of the projectors in positions where their rays could
reach the surrounding country, and the sky, although not the city itself.
Then, ordering our men and girls to hold themselves in readiness for
whatever might occur, we four went off together to fire the sulphur.

The wind was blowing directly toward the city as we stood at the base of
the cliff, a silent little group. I think that now, at this moment, we all
of us hesitated in awe at what we were about to do.

Mercer broke the tension.

"Come on, Alan--let's start it off. Now is the time--a lot of places at
once."

We flashed on our little light-rays, and in a moment the sulphur was on
fire at a score of different points. We drew off a few hundred feet to one
side and sat down to watch it in the darkness. Overhead Tao's red beams
swept like giant search-lights across the inky sky.

The sulphur started burning with tiny little spots of wavering blue flame
that seemed, many of them, about to die away. Gradually they grew larger,
spreading out slowly and silently in ever-widening circles. Under the heat
of the flames the sulphur masses became molten, turned into a viscous dark
red fluid that boiled and bubbled heavily and dropped spluttering upon the
ground.

Slowly the blue-green flames spread about, joining each other and making
more rapid headway--a dozen tiny volcanoes vomiting their deadly fumes and
pouring forth their sluggish, boiling lava. The scene about us now was
lighted in a horrible blue-green glare. A great cloud of thin smoke
gathered, hung poised a moment, and then rolled slowly away--its deadly
fumes hanging low to the ground and spreading ever wider as though eager
to clutch the unsuspecting city in their deadly embrace.

The entire face of the cliff was now covered with the crawling blue fire,
lapping avidly about with its ten-foot tongues. We drew back, staring
silently at each other's ghastly green faces.

"Let's--let's get away," Mercer whispered finally. "No use staying here
now."

We hurried back to the nearest place where one of our projectors was set
up. The two men guarding it looked at us anxiously, and smiled
triumphantly when Miela told them what we had done. We stood beside them a
moment, then Miela and I climbed to an eminence near by from which we had
an unobstructed view of the city.

The light-barrage still held steady. The individual, higher-powered
projectors as before swung their beams lazily about the country. We sat
partly in the shelter of a huge bowlder, behind which we could have
dropped quickly had one of them turned our way.

"Soon it will be there," Miela said softly, when we had been sitting quiet
for a time.

I did not answer. It was indeed too solemn a thing for words, this
watching from the darkness while an invisible death, let loose by our own
hands, stole down upon our complacent enemies.

A few moments more we watched--and still the scene before us showed no
change. Then, abruptly, the lights seemed to waver; some of the beams
swung hurriedly to and fro, then remained motionless in unusual positions,
as though the men at their levers in sudden panic had abandoned them.

My heart was beating violently. What hidden tragedy was being enacted
behind that silent barrier of light? I shuddered as my imagination
conjured up hideous pictures of that unseen death that now must be
stalking about those city streets, entering those homes, polluting the air
with its stifling, noisome breath, and that even at this distance seemed
clutching at my own lungs.

I suppose the whole thing _did_ last only a moment. There was little in
what we saw of significance had we not known. But we did know--and the
knowledge left us trembling and unnerved.

I leaped to my feet, pulling Miela after me, and in a few moments more we
were back beside the projector we had left with Mercer and Anina. Suddenly
a white shape appeared in the sky over the city. It passed perilously
close above the shattered light-barrage and came sailing out in our
direction.

Mercer jumped for the projector, but I was nearer, and in a moment I had
flashed it on.

"It's Tao!" Mercer shouted. "He--"

It was one of Tao's interplanetary vehicles, rising slowly in a great arc
above us. I swung our light-beams upward; it swept across the sky and fell
upon the white shape; the thing seemed to poise in its flight, as though
held by the little red circle of light that fastened upon it, boring its
way in. Then, slowly at first, it fell; faster and faster it dropped,
until it struck the ground with a great crash--the first and only sound of
all this soundless warfare.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was three days before the great sulphur deposit we had ignited burned
itself out. The lights of the city had all died away, and blackness such
as I never hope to experience again settled down upon the scene.

We approached the Dark City then; we even entered one or two of its
outlying houses;, but beyond that we did not go, for we had made certain
of what we wanted to know.

I remember my father once describing how, when a young man, he had gone to
the little island of Martinique shortly after the great volcanic outbreak
of Mount Pele. I remember his reluctance to dwell upon the scenes he saw
there in that silent city of St. Pierre--the houses with their dead
occupants, stricken as they were sitting about the family table; the
motionless forms in the streets, lying huddled where death had overtaken
them in their sudden panic. That same reluctance silences me now, for one
does not voluntarily dwell upon such scenes as those.

A day or so later we found the interplanetary projectile which had sought
to escape. Amid its wreckage lay the single, broken form of Tao--that
leader who, plotting the devastation of two worlds for his own personal
gain, had at the very last deserted his comrades and met his death alone.



CHAPTER XXIX.


THE RETURN.


There is but little more to add. With the death of Tao and the changing of
the law concerning the virgins' wings, my mission on Mercury was over. But
I did not think of that then, for with the war ended, my position as
virtual ruler of the Light Country still held Mercer and me occupied with
a multiplicity of details. It was a month or more after our return from
the Twilight Country that Miela reminded me of father and my duty to him.
"You have forgotten, my husband. But I have not. Your world--it calls you
now. You must go back."

Go back home--to father and dear little Beth! I had not realized how much
I had wanted it.

"What you have done for our nation--for our girls--can never be repaid,
Alan. And you can do more in later years, perhaps. But now your father
needs you--and we must think of him."

I cast aside every consideration of what changes would first have to be
made here on Mercury, and decided in that moment to go.

"But you must go with me, Miela," I said, and then, as I thought of
something else, I added gently: "You will, won't you, little wife? For you
know I cannot leave you now."

She smiled her tender little smile.

"'Whither thou goest, I will go,' my husband," she quoted softly, "'for
thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.'"

We were ready to start at the time of the next inferior conjunction of
Mercury with the earth. At our combined pleading, and with the permission
of his associates, Fuero was persuaded to take command of the nation
during my absence; and I felt I was leaving affairs in able hands.

Lua refused to accompany us; but she urged Anina to go, and the little
girl was ready enough to take advantage of her mother's permission.

Though he said nothing, I shall never forget Mercer's face as this
decision was made.

The vehicle in which Miela had made her former trip was still lying in the
valley where we had left it. We went away privately, only Lua and Fuero
accompanying us out of the city.

Lua parted with her two daughters quietly. Her emotions at seeing them go
she concealed under that sweet, gentle reserve which was characteristic of
her always.

"Promise me you will be careful of her, Alan," she said softly as she
kissed me at parting.

       *       *       *       *       *

We landed in the Chilean Andes, with that patient statue of the Christ to
welcome us back to earth. The Trans-Andean Railroad runs near it, and we
soon were in the city of Buenos Aires. The two girls, with wings shrouded
in their long cloaks, walked about its crowded streets with a wonderment
I can only vaguely imagine. We had only what little money I had taken with
me to Mercury. I interviewed a prominent banker of the city, told him in
confidence who I was, and from him obtained necessary funds.

We cabled father then, and he answered at once that he would come down and
join us. We waited for him down there, and in another month he was with
us--dear old gentleman, leaning over the steamer rail, trying to hold back
the tears of joy that sprang into his eyes at sight of me. Little Beth was
with him, too, smart and stylish as ever, and good old Bob Trevor, whom
she shyly presented as her husband.

The beach at Mar del Plata, near Buenos Aires, is one of the most
beautiful spots in South America; and on a clear moonlit night, with the
Southern Cross overhead, it displays the starry heavens as few other
places can on this earth.

On such a night in February, 1942, Mercer and Anina sat together on the
sand, apart from the gay throng that crowded the pavilion below them. The
girl was dressed all in white, with a long black cape covering her wings.
Her beautiful blond hair was piled on her head in huge soft coils, and
over it she had thrown a filmy, sky-blue mantilla that shone with a soft
luster in the moonlight and seemed reflected in the blue of her eyes.

Mercer in white flannels sat beside her, cross-legged on the white sand,
with a newly purchased Hawaiian guitar across his lap. From the band stand
in the pavilion down the beach faint strains of music floated up to them.
The moon silvered the water before them; a soft, gentle breeze of summer
caressed their cheeks; the myriad stars glittered overhead like brilliant
gems scattered on the turquoise velvet of the sky.

Anina, chin cupped in her hand, sat staring at the wonderful heavens that
all her life before had been withheld from her sight. She sighed
tremulously.

"I want to say this is a night," Mercer declared, breaking a long silence.

"It's--it's beautiful," she answered softly. "Those millions of
worlds--like mine, perhaps--or like this one of yours." She turned to him.
"Ollie, which of them is my world?"

"You can't see it now, Anina. It's too close to the sun."

Again she sighed. "I'm sorry for that. It would seem closer, perhaps, if
we could see it."

"You're not sorry you came, Anina? You don't want to go back now?"

"Not now, Ollie." She smiled into his earnest, pleading eyes. "For those I
love are here as well as there. I have Miela and Alan--and--"

"And?" Mercer leaned forward eagerly.

"And Miela's little son--that darling little baby. We must go back soon
and see Miela. She will be wondering where we are."

Mercer sat back. "Oh," he said. "Yes, we must."

The band in the pavilion stopped its music. Mercer slid his little steel
cross-piece over the guitar strings and began to play the haunting, crying
music of the islands, the music of moonlight and love. After a moment he
stopped abruptly.

"Anina, that little song you sang in the boat that day--you remember--the
day we went to the Water City? Sing it again, Anina."

She sang it through softly, just as she had in the boat, to its last
ending little half-sob.

Mercer laid his guitar on the sand beside him.

"You said that music talks to you, Anina--though sometimes you--you don't
understand just what it tries to say. I feel it that way, too--only--only
to-night--now--I think I _do_ understand."

His voice was very soft and earnest and just a trifle husky.

"You said that it was a love-song, Anina, and it was sad because love is
sad. Do you--think love is always sad?" He put out his hand awkwardly and
touched hers.

"Do you, Anina?" he whispered.

Her little figure swayed toward him. She half turned, and in her shining
eyes he saw the light that needs no words to make its meaning clear.

The timidity that so often before had restrained him was swept away; he
took her abruptly into his arms, kissing her hair, her eyes, her lips.

"Love isn't--always very sad, is it, Anina?"

Her arms held him close.

"I--I don't know," she breathed against his shoulder. "But it's--it's
very--wonderful."WUnLUO AJr SCIENCE FICTION 



August ia/b  fixf 



TWO GREAT NEW NOVELETTES! 



THE INVADERS, Stephen Tall 
PEARSALLS RETURN. FM. Busby 



 plus - 



Clifford D. Simak  Chelsea Quinn Yarbro 
Lester del Rey  Gene Wolfe  David Magil 




The paper time machine 

STRATEGY & TACTICS Is a magazine. It's 
also a tool: a time machine that enables you 
to replay the crucial events  past, present, 
and future  that shape our lives. 

Now. instead of merely reading about what's 
happening, you can explore and experience 
the alternatives and decision points through 
the technique of Conflict Simulation. 



What ia Conflict Simulation? 

Conflict Simulation is a way of analyzing a 
political or military conflict situation. A way 
that is as intellectually stimulating as a game 
of chess, and as thorough as a written analysis. 

Through the use of the Conflict Simulation 
(or "game") format, the conflict situation is 
re-created -so that you are in a position to 
make the vital decisions and, in the game at 
least, change the way things were, are, or 



will b 



What you gel 

STRATEGY 4 TACTICS magazine is publish- 
ed bi-monthly. Each issue contains: 

 A ready-to-play conflict-simulation game 
with a 22 x 28" playing surface, die-cut play- 



ing pieces, and complete rules. 

* An analytical article on the same subject as 
the game in that issue. 

* Other feature articles on historical and 
military subjects. 

* Game and book reviews, commentary on 
existing games, and discussions of subscribers' 
questions. 

The magazine is 48 + pages long, and all 
material is handled in a highly organized (and 
easily understandable) graphic format. 

Games recently published in STRATEGY 4 
TACTICS were GRUNT (ground combat in 
Vietnam), LOST BATTLES (tactical combat in 
Russia, 1941-44), USN (the war in the Pacific, 
1941-43), COMBAT COMMAND (tactical com- 
bat in Western Europe, 1944). 

We also publish a separate line of conflict- 
simulation games, which you will find listed in 
the coupon.  - 

Free to new subscribers 
NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO, history's greatest 
battle presented in a game-design specially 
created to introduce new readers to Conflict 
Simulation. 



I Send check or M.O. to: 

| Simulations Publications Inc. 

Dept. 4 84 44 Ext 23rd St.. New York. N.Y. 10010 



Please enter my subscription to S. & T. for: 
11 Year (6 issues) -$10 
U 2 Yrs. (12 issues) SI 7 
13 Yrs. (18 issues) $24 
J Current issue $4 



Sand me the following Simulation Games: 
Kursk (Russia. 1943)-$6 
Korea (1950-51)  *6 
Phalanx (ancient Greece)-$6 
 -"--iw* (Russia, 1 941 -45)  $6 

(Napoleonic Wars. 1813) $6 
*-- (the 0-Day lnvasion)-$6 



|  Please s 



e your free brochure. 



j Address  
 City 




The paper time machine 

STRATEGY & TACTICS is a magazine. Its 
also a tool: a time machine that enables you 
to replay the crucial events  past, present, 
and future  that shape our lives. 

Now, instead of merely reading about what's 
happening, you can explore and experience 
the alternatives and decision points through 
the technique of Conflict Simulation 

What is Conflict Simulation? 

Conflict Simulation is a way of analyzing a 
political or military conflict situation. A way 
that is as intellectually stimulating as a game 
of chess, and as thorough as a written analysis 

Through the use of the Conflict Simulation 
(or "game") format, the conflict situation is 
re-created  so that you are in a position to 
make the vital decisions and. in the game at 
least, change the way things were. are. or 
will be 

What you gat 

STRATEGY & TACTICS magazine is publish- 
ed bi-monthly. Each issue contains: 

 A ready-to-play conflict-simulation game 
with a 22 x 28" playing surface, die-cut play- 



ing pieces, and complete rules. 

* An analytical article on the same subject as 
the game in that issue. 

* Other feature articles on historical and 
military subjects. 

* Game and book reviews, commentary on 
existing games, and discussions of subscribers' 
questions. 

The magazine is 48 + pages long, and all 
material is handled in a highly organized (and 
easily understandable) graphic format. 

Games recently published in STRATEGY & 
TACTICS were: GRUNT (ground combat in 
Vietnam). LOST BATTLES (tactical combat in 
Russia, 1941-44), USN (the war in the Pacific, 
1941-43), COMBAT COMMAND (tactical com- 
bat m Western Europe, 1944). 

We also publish a separate line of conflict- 
simulation games, which you will find listed in 
the coupon. 

Free to new subscribers 

NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO, history's greatest 
battle presented in a game-design specially 
created to introduce new readers to Conflict 
Simulation. 



Send check or M.O. to: 

Simulations Publications Inc. 

Ospt. 491 44 Eat 23rd St.. New York. N.Y. 10010 

Please enter my subscription to S. A T. for: 
ni Year (6 issues)- $10 

 2 Yrs. (12 issues) SI 7 
h 3 Yrs. (18 issues) $24 

 Current issue $4 



Send me the following Simulation Games: 
Kursk (Russia. 19431-S6 
Korea (1 950-51 )-S6 
Phalanx (ancient Greece)-S8 
Barbarosea (Russia. 1941-45)-** 

Leipzig (Napoleonic Wars. 1813)-S6 
Normandy (the D-Oay Invasion)-** 

 Please send me your free brochure. 



Name 

City State Zip 



WORLDS OF _ 

rfh SCIENCE 
I I 3 FICTION 



July- August 1973 
Vol. 21, No. 12 
Issue 166 

ALL NEW 
STORIES 



Arnold E. Abramson, Publisher 

Ejler Jakobsson, Editor Theodora Sturgeon, Contributing Editor 

Albert Dytch, Managing Editor Lester del Rey, Feature Editor 

L. C. Murphy, Subscription Director Jay Tunick, Circulation Director 



NOVELETTES 

PEARSALL'S RETURN, F.M. Busby 6 

THE INVADERS, Stephen Tall 42 

SERIAL ( Conclusion ) 

OUR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN, 

Clifford D. Simak  118 

SHORT STORIES 

THE MEANING OFTHE WORD, 

Chelsea Quinn Yarbro 71 

SUPPORT YOUR LOCAL POLICE, David Magil 90 

WESTWIND, Gene Wolfe 110 

FEATURES 

HUE AND CRY: Readers Write and Wrong 5 

SF CALENDAR 87 

READING ROOM, Lester del Rey 103 



Cover by David A. Hardy: ASTRONAUTS ON DEIMOS 



Worlds of IF is published bimonthly by 
UPD Publishing Corporation, a subsid- 
iary 'of Universal Publishing & Distribut- 
ing Corporation. Arnold E. Abramson, 
President. Main Offices: 236 East 46 
Street, New York, N.Y. 10017. Single 
copy: 76e. 12-issue subscription: $9.00 
in U.S., $10.00 elsewhere. 



Worlds of IF is published in the United 
Kingdom by Universal-Tandem Publishing 
Company, Ltd., 14 Gloucester Road, Lon- 
don SW7 4RD. Arnold E. Abramson, 
Chairman of -the Board. Ralph Stokes, 
Managing Director. Single copy: 26p. 12- 
issue subscription in the United Kingdom: 
 3.60. 



Copyright  1973 by UPD Publishing Corporation under International, Univer- 
sal and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. All rights reserved. Second class 
postage paid at New York, N.Y. and additional mailing offices. The publishers as- 
sume no responsibility for unsolicited material. AU stories printed in this mag- 
azine are fiction and any similarity between characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Printed in U.S.A. 



2 









WHO Aft 




After lo, these many years of reading WORLDS OF IF, you must know 
who we are. The only thing we, however, know about you is that you read 
science fiction. But now we need to know more about you to continue to 
bring you the type of fiction  and, incidentally, advertisements  that will 
interest you. Please fill in the following in as much detail as you can; your 
time will be well spent and most appreciated. 

1 . Male Female 

2 . Age 

3. Student: High School College 

4 . College graduate Degrees 

S'. Income: Under $5000 $5-10,000 $10-T5,000 

$15-25,000 Over $25,000 

0. Profession 

7. Own Home Rent: House Apartment 

8 . What magazines, other than science fiction, do you read regularly? 



9. Do you travel? Business Pleasure. USA 

Europe Other 



3 



10. Means of travel: Plane Auto Train Bus 

Other 

11. Do your own: Boat Est. value Automobile 

Est. value Hi-Fi equipment Est. value 

Home Workshop Est. value Camper/Motor 

Home Est. Value Camera equipment 

Est. value Motorcycle Est. value 

Snowmobile Est. value 

12. Interests: Skiing Fishing Swimming 

Hunting Golfing Tennis Bowling 

Camping Flying Boating Gardening 

Home repairs Photography 7 Stamp collecting 

Coin collecting Other 

13. Afffllatlons: Fraternal 

Professional 

Athletic 

Social  : 

0 

Scientific 

Other 

14. Are you a member of: Book Club Record club 

Other 

15. Volunteer organizations: Fire Department PTA 

Red Cross Political club 

16. Investments: Stocks Bonds Real Estate 

Thank you for taking the time to respond to our Questionnaire. Please 
send your completed form to: 

IF Reader Research 
235 East 45 Street 
New York, NY 10017 



4 




HUE 

ancL i pi, ): 

CRY  ? ' 



Rrjdt-fs wri[t. <im! wrotur 



Dear Mr. Jakobsson: 

I have several things to comment on 
regarding the April  73 Worlds of If. 
I have never really enjoyed del Rey as 
a reviewer until this issue, but this 
was a review from which much can be 
learned. Most reviewers seldom 
come down hard on even a bad book, 
but Mr. del Rey did a fine job on Clon- 
ing. I like reviewers who demand a 
lot and let readers know when a book 
may not be up to par. 

Vll be paying closer, attention to this 
column from now on. 

I am about to add Colin Kapp to my 
small but growing list of authors who 
cause me to sit up all night reading. So 
far only Delany and Ursula K. LeGuin 
have managed the feat. Now Mr. 
Kapp has joined them. / cant remem- 
ber a serial that has had me more 
eagerly waiting for : the next install- 
ment than his last one in If. The con- 
clusion of The Wizard of Anharitte 
was the first thing I read in the April is- 
sue and it was good to the end  one of 
the most entertaining, enjoyable 
and best thought-out books Ive had 
the pleasure to read in a long time. 

Another thing Id like to bring up 
deals with the suddenly (to me) 
asinine efforts (including my own) at 
defining science fiction. We are 
madly trying to name the thing, draw 
its limits , say where it stops , where it 
starts and how far it can go. This is a 



little like saying that the universe is 
infinitf, but ends four hundred miles 
beyond Pluto. Nuts. I think most peo- 
ple at least sense that science fiction is 
a literature without limits, so what 
the hell are we trying to limit it for? 
My feeling is that the so-called  hard- 
core  advocates are way off base. The 
argument is silly  science fiction is 
that form of literature that cant be de- 
fined. 

So why dont we just get down to 
reaching out farther with our imag- 
inations  thats what the field needs. 

One last item: Does anyone know if 
there is a science fiction club in Van- 
couver? Ive just moved here from the 
east and have been unable to find out. 
Nicholas Grimshawe 
Vancouver, B. C. 

Will those in the know please reply 
in care of Hue and Cry? Mr. Grim- 
shawe, an old and valued contributor 
to this department, neglected to en- 
close his latest address. Contribu- 
tors complete addresses are pub- 
lished only upon request  in this case 
to do so might have been in order. 

Dear Mr. Jakobsson: 

It seems that / have entered my sub- 
scriptions at an odd date just when 
the last Jack Gaughan art died away 
from the covers of If and Galaxy. Will 
the old fellow ever be coming back? 
Oh, sure  I see plenty of his sketches 
inside, but none outside. 

Cover by Brian Boyle, says an in- 
side page. I sigh in passive sad- 
ness  no Gaughan. Ever since his 
weirdo covers for the lensman series 
Ive been following his artwork all 
across the world of sf books and mag - 
( Continued on page / 74) 



5 





6 




NOVELETTE 



I 

THHE door was locked, so Pear- 
sail rang the door chime  who 
carries a housekey halfway down 
the galaxys arm and back, eight 
months by Skip Drive? It was long 
enough, he saw, for the white paint 
to have begun flaking off the door. 
Pearsall had applied that paint 
slowly and lovingly only a few 
weeks before Hawk Flight's depar- 
ture. The industrial fumes evi- 
dently had been getting worse. 

His wife opened the door. 
Who  Woody! She flung herself 
at him, arms reaching and clasp- 
ing  but only for a moment. Sud- 
denly she recoiled and staggered 
back, her face contorted. 

No! She backed away through 
the foyer toward the living room, 



7 



hands clenching and unclenching, 
gray eyes wide and mouth slack 
with shock. 

He followed, but didnt try to 
touch her. Whats the matter, 
Glenna? Something was happen- 
ing too fast  he couldnt believe 
her reaction, let alone understand 
it. You heard the ship was in, 
didnt you? Her face was pale, the 
fine cheekbones standing out from 
the faint hollows Tjelow. She shook 
her head. Her mouth worked but 
no words came out. _ 

Youve cut your hair, he said. 
She had always worn it long and 
straight. Now it was a mass of 
short curls, tinted a lighter red- 
brown than he remembered. One 
curl hung loose over her right eye- 
brow, near the tiny black mole at 
the corner of her eye. Almost as 
tall as he, still slim, she stood rig- 
idly defensive, angles of bone ac- 
centing her loose beige robe. 

Who are you? What do you 
want? 

It didnt make sense. He tried to 
smile but the smile died  he sup- 
pressed an impulse to reach out to 
her. Well, who do I look like? 
His tone was gentle. Have I 
changed so much in only eight 
months? 

Her fisted hands stood out * 
little from her sides, shaking. 
Whoever you are, it isnt funny! 
Its a cruel, cruel joke! Now he 

8 



felt the edge of panic  sweat 
prickled at his armpits. 

She turned arid ran to the bed- 
room, paused just inside the door- 
way. Get out! You get out of 
here! I have a gun. My  my hus- 
bands. So you just better get out of 
here! She disappeared behind the 
door  he heard her rummaging 
through drawers. 

To Pearsall, his mind stalled at 
dead center, the chime of the pic- 
turephone came almost as a rblief. 
Automatically he set his bag on the 
floor and crossed the room to flip 
the switch, the thought came that 
hed never heard of anyone being 
shot while answering the phone and 
he almost grinned. But not 
quite a bullet was not what he 
feared. 

The chubby-faced man on the 
screen was familiar by sight but not 
by name  a junior member of the 
spaceport commanders staff. 

Yes, the man said, we 
thought you might be there. He 
waved Pearsall to silence. Weve 
pinpointed the discrepancy noted in 
the records when Hawk Flight 
landed. Admiral Forgues wants to 
discuss that with you. Meanwhile, 
a John Laifd urgently requests that 
you call him at his home. One of 
your navigation personnel, I be- 
lieve. The young man seemed al- 
most hysterical. 

Forgues, the port commander,* 

IF 




moved into the picture. Ill take 
it  Ill take it   Peripherally, 
Pearsall saw Glenna in the bed- 
room doorway. She had found the 
.old automatic pistol but the gun 
pointed at the floor as she watched 
Pearsall and the screen. 

All right, said Forgues, lets 
get to the bottom of this. Who are 
you? 

Exasperation drove out fear. 
Pearsall exhaled hard. Sir, I am 
Commander Elwood Jay Pearsall, 
first officer on Hawk Flight. 
Youve known me for fifteen years 
at least. Is my identity in doubt? 
It certainly is. Whoever you are 
youre not Woody Pearsall  and 
what you were doing on Hawk 
Flight , I dont know. But I intend 
to find out. So you might as well 
tell the truth. Now. 

Damn it, sir, Im Woody Pear- 
sall. He shook his head briskly to 
clear it of cobwebs. Who the hell 
else would I be? 

Forgues grinned tightly. Well, 
in that case we do have a problem. 
Because, you see, you're dead. 

T HE viewscreen, as Pearsall 
maneuvered Hawk Flight to its 
final descent, was spattered with 
random moving dots. He jiggled a 
tuning knob slightly, but saw no 
improvement. The knob was 
sticky. He made a mental note to 
tell young Laird that if he abso- 



lutely had to eat on watch, for 
Gods sake to wipe his hands be- 
fore touching the equipment. 

The landing area showed clearly 
enough, but the flashing dots were 
a distraction. The viewing equip- 
ment was due for a full over- 
haul but then, so was the entire 
ship. And so was Pearsall. 

The spaceport looked unfamil- 
iar, somehow. To hisj*ight, toward 
the nearby city, he remembered a 
soaring tower topping a white, 
shining building. Surely it couldnt 
have been torn down in the .eight 
months hed been away  the build- 
ing had been almost new. Perhaps 
he was confusing one spaceport 
with another  perhaps an overdose 
of Skip Drive was fogging his 
memory. He put full attention to 
landing the ship. The impact was 
barely noticeable. 

Nice grounding. Woody. The 
voice over the intercom was Cap- 
tain Vailles. Give the watch to 
Laird and report to my quarters, 
would you, please? 

Pearsall acknowledged. 

All your^, he said to John 
Laird. See you next, on the 
ground, probably. The main- 
tenance crew will be here to relieve 
you as soon as our landing blast 
cools. When they arrive call the 
captains quarters for clearance 
and youre home free. 

Yes, sir, said Laird. Now re- 



PE ARSALL'S RETURN 



9 




member, Commander, I want you 
and your wife to meet my family, 
have dinner with us, as soon as you 
can. You have the address? 

Right. He tipped Laird a 
mock-salute and left. 

The captains quarters were one 
deck below. Halfway down the nar- 
row ladder Pearsalls heel caught 
on a torn edge of plastic. He almost 
fell, but caught himself. Damned 
old crock really needs some work, 
he grumbled. But he patted the 
bulkhead beside him to soften the 
curse before proceeding to the cap- 
tains cabin. 

Vaille was big, taller and heavier 
than Pearsall. On his desk were a 
bottle and two small glasses. 

A toast. Woody? Its been a 
hard trip, but a good one. They 
raised their glasses, sipped. The li- 
quor was an oTf-world product, a 
brandy from Harpers Touchdown. 
Golden flecks hung in the dark 
fluid. 

Youre right, skipper  a good, 
hard trip. Eight months on high 
Skip-factor, never landing, only 
slowing a few times for fly-by re- 
connaissance of new planetary sys- 
tems, took a lot out of men and 
ship alike. But the odds had been 
good to them  Hawk Flight's un- 
manned one-way probes had dis- 
covered two new habitable planets, 
potential colony sites. 

We should be able to dis- 



embark in an hour or two, said 
Vaille. All the tapes and solar- 
wind samples are boxed to go. I 
imagine everyone^ has his own stuff 
packed, or nearly. I can throw my 
gear together in five minutes. 
Pearsall grinned. Me, too. Or 
leave it  and good riddance. 
Vaille laughed with him. It was 
good to be home. Even the nor- 
mally reticent captain was affected. 

In due time the maintenance- 
and-repair crew boarded. Its chief 
brought clearance papers, thus ac- 
cepting responsibility^ for the 
ship  red tape was minimal. 
Spaceport personnel began the un- 
loading of cargo. And finally 
Hawk Flight's crew, fifteen men 
and nine women, trod the catwalk 
to the outside gantry, rode the ele- 
vator down and touched shoe soles 
to Earths concrete rind. As al- 
ways, that moment gripped Pear- 
salls throat. 

P ORT Commander Forgues no 
longer greeted returning crews 
personally. Many ships came and 
went now and Forgues had other 
duties  procedures had been 
streamlined. Even the newspersons 
stayed away; making do with offi- 
cial handouts unless a real news 
-item were involved. Announcement 
of the two new colony planets, 
Pearsall guessed, would soon bring 
them running. 



10 



IF 




He didnt recognize the subordi- 
nate who was preparing to do the 
honors. The man struck him as a 
bit of a fussbudget, with his clip- 
board in one hand and pencil 
shifted awkwardly back and forth 
between handshakes. 

Captain Vaille? Yes. Check- 
mark, shift pencil, handshake. 
Welcome. Honored, sir. End of 
handshake. Shift pencil. First Of- 
ficer Frantiszek? Checkmark. 
Shift pencil. 

No. Im First Officer Pear- 
sall. No handshake. The pencil 
wavered. 

Pearsall? Must be a mixup. 
Wheres Frantiszek? 

Pearsall looked for Vaille to an- 
swer, but the captain was talking 
with someone else, a few feet away. 
I replaced Frantiszek when he 
broke his leg skiing, a week before 
we left. Funny you didnt get the 
correction. The mishap had 
boosted Pearsall to First Officer a 
year or two before he had expected 
the promotion. 

Erase checkmark, scribble note. 
All right  well check it out, the 
man said and moved along to the 
next person. No handshake for 
Pearsall. Bored, he withdrew his 
attention while the man check- 
marked and handshook his way 
down the list. 

A tone of exclamation broke his 
reverie. Laird? My roster shows 

PEARSALL'S RETURN 



r 




Donald A. Wollheim, Publisher. 

\ First Time in Paperback ] | 

| By popular demand. Lin Carter's ! | 

! thrilling fantasy adventure WHEN 1 | 

I THE GREEN STAR CALLS. The ! | 

I first "Green Star" novel (d la Bur- I | 

| roughs and Merritt) brought in ! | 

| tons of enthusiastic letters from ! ; 

| readers, and we think this new ] } 

; novel is even more enthralling! It ] [ 

; is fully illustrated too. ; > 

; (UQ1 062-95*) 

| THE WRONG END OF TIME is j ! 

; John Brunner in his best modern j ! 

; style. What happens when an al- < ! 

> ien visitor threatens the destruc- < I 
! tion of Earth and Earth is too [ 

! busy hating its own -components [ 

! even to heed the news? [ 

I (UQ1 061-95*) !; 

I THE BOOK OF PHILIP JOSE \\ 

! FARMER is subtitled by its J ; 
t author, last year's Hugo-winning J ; 

| novelist. "The Wares of Simple J ; 

I Simon's Custard Pie and Space j  

J Man." Why? Because it contains ] - 
[ a feast of riches in stories, articles j > 

' and Phil's own comments. A J 

 sheer delight. (UQt 063 95*) \ 

j TESTAMENT XXI. by Guy Snyder, j 
 represnts the discovery of an un- ; 

I usual new science-fiction talent, j 
! It brings a vision of the next cen- | 

! tury that will inevitably invite < 

! comparison with the work of < 

! Samuel R. Delany (another Woll- < 

! heim first) and Harlan Ellison. ! 

I ( UQ1 064-95 *) 

######################## 




no John Laird. What is your posi- 
tion on this ship? 

Junior navigator, sir, the boy 
answered. On commander Pear- 
salls watch. 

Pearsall, eh? Neither of you is 
on my roster. He harumphed. 
Well check it out. No hand- 
shake for Laird either. 

They were escorted to a nearby 
building for a quick, perfunctory 
medical check. Orin Teague, Hawk 
Flight's own medical officer, had 
made thorough examinations and 
certified the ships complement as 
free of alien infection, but the min- 
imum formality was still observed. 

Then they were free, the two 
dozen, to go where they would and 
do what they could. Report back 
Tuesday morning, said the man 
with the discrepant list. Oh-eight 
hundred sharp. That gives you sev- 
enty-two hours, less a few. By 
Tuesday, Pearsall thought, their re- 
ports would be analyzed  the re- 
ports they had prepared during the 
past in-flight months. Until then 
Hawk Flight's crew was super- 
fluous. That suited him just fine. 

He shook all the hands he could 
find, waved goodbyes and left to 
catch a city-bound tube train. On 
arrival he used his spacemans pri- 
ority card to rent a ground car. He 
checked its fuel-cell reading and set 
off for Fishers Landing, the small 
neighboring town that was home. 



He didnt call first  it had never 
been his habit. 

During his absence some street 
routings had been changed. He 
found his usual access to the 
throughway was one-way in the 
wrong direction. Rather than tak- 
ing time to solve the new layout, he 
settled for an older, secondary arte- 
rial and soon made his way out of 
the city into a countryside of roll- 
ing hills. 

It was that time! of autumn when 
leaves turn color but have yet to 
fall. One small maple, yellow and 
fed, so entranced him that he 
pulled over and stopped just to 
look, to make it part of him. 

He left before he was done with 
his tree, because now he was so 
near that he could no longer wait to 
see Glenna. Married to him for al- 
most twenty-five years, more than 
half his life she still brought all 
his senses alive. 

Either the signs had been 
changed or he had day- 
dreamed he missed his turn-off. 
But he circled, found an unfamiliar 
road with the proper designation. 
Soon he was back on his homeward 
route and enterings Fishers Land- 
ing. Until he turned into his own 
street he didnt realize he had been 
driving faster than usual. 

He parked in front and paused a 
moment to look at the house, sa- 
voring the weathered wood. Ivy 



12 



IF 




was growing to cover the bay win- 
dow again  it needed cutting back. 
A brick, maybe more than one, 
was missing from the chimney top 
 he tried to remember if hed seen 
it before. He couldnt be sure. No 
matter  hed have to fix it anyway. 

He got out of the car and locked 
it, taking only his bag, leaving his 
other luggage for later. He strode 
up the flagstone walk, finally giv- 
ing impatience its head. 

By habit he reached into his 
pocket for the house key. Then he 
laughed and rang the door chime. 

^fT\EAD, sir? Pearsall stared 
^^at Forgues' blue-tinted 
image and shook his head. One 
of us has to be crazy." 

Thats possible, said the admi- 
ral. Why else would you pretend 
to be a man who was killed more 
than a year ago? Tube train fail- 
ure  you must have seen it in the 
news. The propelling field col- 
lapsed. Cars smashed out through 
the girders. At least seventy dead. 
Not me, though. Now he re- 
membered the disaster. I missed 
that train. 

Obviously, said Forgues, but 
Pearsall didnt. You look like 
hinr  or like his twin if he had 
one  but you cant be Woody. I at- 
tended the funeral myself, damn it! 
So who are you? 

To Pearsall none of it made 



sense  but somewhere there had to 
be a handle, a place to apply logic 
and twist hard. 

Ask the captain, he said. 
Captain Vaille  he can vouch for 
me. 

Forgues shook his head. Cant 
locate him. He and his wife went 
off somewhere, left no word. 

But any of the other offi- 
cers  or the crew? The admirals 
head still moved side-to-side, his 
face stony in negation. Or 
even  the fussy fellow with the 
clipboard. He saw me come off the 
ship 

 But he didnt see you get on. Or 
where you got on. Abruptly For- 
gues face went stiff, his eyes wide. 

At first Pearsall didnt get 
it and then he did. He laughed.- 
 Hawk Flight made no outworld 
landings. Admiral. We didnt even 
have occasion to use the airlocks. 
Run the telemetry tapes through 
your computers. Faced with ques- 
tions that had answers he felt his 
mind coming alive, working surely. 

The admirals grin was sheepish. 
All right, thats easy enough to 
check. We can scratch the sugges- 
tion that youre some kind of alien. 
But that doesnt tell me who you 
are. So you tell me. 

Pearsall shook his head. Ive 
done that. Sir, with all due respect, 
were wasting time. Theres a mis- 
take somewhere  I dont know 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



13 




what it is. Ill report Tuesday as or- 
dered. Meanwhile I have a couple 
of personal problems to attend 
to  urgent ones/ He hit the cutoff 
switch before the admiral could 
reply. He daught himself worrying 
with a fingertip the spot at the 
crown of the head where his hair 
was thinning and took his hand 
away. 

And what of Glenna? He turned 
and saw her standing near the bed- 
room doorway, the old handgun 
hanging loose in her hand. She 
stared at him, but now in puz- 
zlement rather than outrage. 

Well, Glenna? Am I me  the 
man you married? 

You cant be. He could barely 
hear her words. Woody is 
dead I saw him buried. She 
winced. Oh, you look like him, 
talk and act like him  but you 
cant be him. The gun dropped 
to the carpet. I wish to God you 
could. But you cant. She put her 
hands to her face  leaning back 
against the wall she slowly sank to 
the floor and sat there, sobbing. 

Knowing he must not touch her, 
Pearsall moved to squat facing her, 
not close enough to threaten. Qui- 
etly he spoke. 

Glenna  Glenna. Again: 
Glenna. Repeating her name 
slowly until she raised her head and 
looked at him. 

I am Woody, he said, 



Woody Pearsall. I look and talk 
and -act like him and love like 
him  because I am him. Im me, 
Glenna, nobody else. A long time 
ago we married each other  
remember? Blankfaced, her head 
shook slowly. 

The tube train didnt kill me 
that night because I missed it. I 
was late for dinner. You were 
really angry when I finally got 
home  until we saw the news of 
the wreck. Ive been gone eight 
months on Hawk Flight . Before I 
left you and I had a champagne 
dinner  more champagne than 
dinner, Im afraid. Then we took a 
boat out near the middle of Lake 
Fisher and made love there. Dont 
you remember? 

Id like to. Oh, Id like to! 
Then her voice went dull. But I 
cant  because it didnt happen. 

To me it did. And you were 
there. You were all of it. Try to 
remember. 

Id like to, she said again. 
But I saw my husband dead. 
Facing him, she was like a blank 
wall. 

Im dead and Im not dead. 
He spoke more toiiimself than to 
her. We made love on the lake^ 
and we didnt. I was v on the ship but 
I wasnt. The admiral helped bury 
me  but Im not buried. 
Glenna   His tone snapped her 
alert. I dont know whats wrong, 



14 



IF 





s 
h 

ve i about ai. 
'^Vor whose most popu- 

0 We^ red .^ obsess Ws mtnd 

HO OSE 



but if theres any way I can do so 
Ill find out. He sighed and 
touched her hair gingerly, as 
though it might electrocute him. 
I have to leave now for a while. 
But try to know who I am. Will 
you? 

She managed no words, but nod- 
ded, then fled, crying. 

J OHN LAIRDS line was busy. 

Pearsall calculated  it was less 
than an hours drive  best to go 
now, without calling ahead. And 
better, he thought, not to stay in 
one place too long  Forgues might 
decide to have him pulled in rather 
than wait until Tuesday. The front- 
door key was on its usual hook in 



the kitchen. He took it. 

Dusk had come, the time of 
beauty that is dangerous to drivers. 
Pearsall drove fast but with full 
concentration and alert- 
ness officially he might be dead 
but factually he was alive' and de- 
termined to remain so. 

He passed an apartment high- 
rise  it loomed gray, square and 
ugly, but the massed upper win- 
dows reflected the last of the days 
sun as molten copper. The glow fit 
his mood. He watched until it 
passed to the side of his vision. 

The Laird home was hidden in a 
semi-suburban housing cluster, a 
puzzle-piece of contrived curving 
streets that changed names at every 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 






jogging. By backtracking and per- 
sistence Pearsall found the address 
he sought. 

In the dim light the house both 
sprawled and soared. Its style of 
architecture had bloomed rapidly 
and dated almost as fast. He 
parked in the double-width drive- 
way and approached the huge, oval 
front door. Finding no pushbutton, 
he knocked. 

An older, heavier version of 
John Laird opened the door. All 
right, what do you want? The man 
sounded as harassed as he looked, 
with his rumpled hair, high color 
and heavy breathing. 

Tm looking for John Laird. 

You found him. What do you 
want with me? 

The John Laird I know is 
younger. Your son, perhaps? 

No  Christ, no! But maybe 
youd better come in, at that. You 
might be able to help. 

Help? How? But Pearsall 
thought he knew. 

A young man came here. He 
says hes my son, claims to be 
named John Laird. I came home 
this afternoon  my wife was half- 
crazy. This boy we never saw was 
calling her mother and then me, 
father. And damn it, we never saw 
him before   

How do you figure I can help? 

Sounded as if you said you 
knew him. If you do, maybe you 



can get some sense out of him. He 
locked himself in the bathroom and 
wont come out. Come on  Ill 
show you the way. 

Pearsall was led into a large liv- 
ing room, past a plump, wide-eyed 
woman* a boy about twenty and 
two teenaged girls  he was in- 
troduced to none of them  along a 
hall, to a door. Closed, it 
was  closed, and inscrutable. 

Laird nodded. Hes in there. 
All right. He raised his voice. 
John Laird. This is Pearsall. 

II 

44/^OMMANDER. The voice 
^-'was muffled. Thank God 
youre here  someone who knows 
Im real. I thought I was going 
crazy. Or that everybody else was. 
I  think I know how you feel, 
John. Pearsall grinned briefly, a 
ticlike twitch. Why dont you 
come out now and talk it over? 
Lets see if any of this makes sense. 
All right? 

You wont let them send me 
away? 

Pearsall thought  he couldnt 
speak for the Laird- family. If you 
cant stay here, John, you can come 
with me. Will that do? 

I guess so. The" door opened. 
Young John Laird, looking both 
sheepish and defiant, emerged. 
Pearsall shepherded the two Lairds 



16 



IF 




to the living room, where the others 
sat stiffly, as though posing for an 
old tintype. 

Im Commander Pearsall, he 
said, First officer of the ship Hawk 
Flight. As you may have heard, 
weve just returned from an eight- 
month mission. He turned to the 
older man. Would you introduce 
me? 

All right, Commander. You 
know my name. This is my wife, 
Bonita  my son Charles  my 
daughters Mildred   he nodded 
at the older girl   and Irene. 

Pearsall smiled and performed 
the ritual courtesies. And now, 
he ^aid, may I introduce this 
young man, who for the past eight 
months has served as my junior na- 
vigator? He is listed on the ships 
roster as John Laird, Jr.  of this 
address. 

I cant believe that, Mr. Laird 
said. 

The roster isnt classified  I 
can get you a photostat if you 
like. Impatiently Pearsall shook 
his head. But right now  Laird, 
men on watch together pass the 
time by talking and they talk of 
home. Young John here has spoken 
often of you. He has described this 
house to me and many pleasant 
recollections of it. __ 

Tell me, he said, do none of 
you recognize him at all? He saw 
only blank stares. Are you saying 



that its some kind of delusion that 
he believes himself to be your son 
and brother? 

Bonita Laird spoke, her voice 
low. I have two sons: James and 
Charles. Two daughters: Mildred 
and Irene. There would have been a 
John, but   

7 have two brothers, said 
young John Laird, breathing in 
gasps, as though at high altitude, 
Two brothers  James and 
Charles  and a sister Mildred. 
He turned to the younger girl. I 
dont know what youre doing 
here  I dont have any sister 
Irene. She shrank away. 

He reached a hand toward her. 
Oh, wait  Im not saying you 
shouldn't exist  I wont do that to 
you. Youre here. I dont under- 
stand it but I wont tell you not to 
be here, the way Dads been telling 
me   He frowned. I just dont 
know why Im not supposed to be 
here^thats all. Because I live 
here. Ive lived here all my life with- 
all of you  except Irene. And 
James was here, too  wheres my 
brother James? 

Your brother James, Mr. 
Laird began, I mean, my son 
James  was married last spring. 
He and his wife live north of here 
about forty miles, in the Horizon 
Hills complex. He hunched his 
shoulders for a, moment, let them 
retax again. I dont see what this 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



17 




has to do with your barging in, 
claiming to be my son. I should 
know how many children we 
have   

Pearsall suddenly felt pity for 
them all  and some for himself. 
Mrs. Laird, you said a moment 
ago that there would have been a 
son named John. Could you ex- 
plain that, please? 

Color flooded her cheeks. For a 
moment he could see the pretty girl 
hiding behind the armor of 
fat  the ultimate disguise for 
beauty afraid of itself. Mr. Pear- 
sall  Commander Pearsall, I 
mean  its not really any of your 
business, but if it will help this 
young man  well, when my James 
was two I had a son born dead. 
And his name would have been 
John. 

But James was two when I was 
bom, young Laird protested. 
And I grew up here and we 
all  you dont know me? You 
dont know me at all? 

Five heads shook as one. 

Gently Pearsall said, Dont any 
of you see a family resemblance  a 
possible relationship? Couldnt you 
start as cousins or something and 
work up? He knew he was pushing 
too hard on something he didnt 
fully understand, but his own needs 
were eating him. And some wild 
guesses were beginning to take 
shape. So he laid it on the line and 



hoped. Cant you try something? 

He lost. We cant take a 
stranger into our home, said the 
elder Laird. Bonita Lairds mouth 
twitched, but she did not speak. Of 
them all, it was Irene who 
protested. 

7 wouldnt mind if he stayed, 
she said. She shook back her fair 
hair, fallen forward over one shoul* 
der. I like him. 

Out of the question. Her fa- 
thers face showed fear. Fear of 
what? 

Pearsall knew when to cut his 
losses. Lets go, John. He gave 
the obligatory handshakes. 

Young Laird looked at each per- 
son in turn. He paused at Bonita 
but shook his head. He spoke only 
to Irene. Thanks, he muttered 
and touched her hand briefly. Pear- 
sall took his arm firmly and led 
him away. The boys luggage was 
at the front door  Pearsall picked 
it up and got the two of them out 
and safely away. 

In the car, before starting it, he 
said, Youre not insane, John. 
Youre up against a problem thats 
totally new, thats all. And so am 
I. 

P EARSALL had nowhere to go 
,but home  and there only if 
Glenna allowed it. If she did  he 
supposed Laird could stay also. 
What effect the boys presence 



18 



IF 




might have he couldnt guess. To 
learn that the universe held other 
confusions, other entrapments, 
might help her. 

Driving through the night, his 
headlights carving a dark-walled 
tunnel as the road skirted a swamp, 
Pearsall explained his own 
problem. 

So, to her, he finished, Im 
an impostor. I have to be  she saw 
me dead. He made a wordless 
sound. I suppose I should find my 
grave and pay my respects. 
Were in the same boat, arent 
we? said Laird. Except that your 
wife knows at least that she was 
married to you. My family simply 
doesnt believe I exist  or ever did. 
I cant understand it  whats hap- 
pened to everybody? 

We happened to them. Other- 
wise theyre all perfectly sane, sen- 
sible people. 

Then were whats wrong? Or 
has the whole world gone crazy? 
No, were fine, John  just fine. 
So far anyway. And as worlds go, 
this one is sane and good. 

Then what is wrong? 

Dont you get it yet? Well, Im 
not sure I do, either, in detail. But 
one things clear  this perfectly 
good world isn't our world. 

You mean this isnt Earth? 
Of course its Earth. 
But  different, somehow. Prob- 
ably more so than weve realized. 



You mean, my family back 
there  it isnt really the one I grew 
up with? 

Almost, but not quite. They 
had a son bom dead, so theyre not 
the same people theyd be if he had 
lived. The difference isnt 
much  except to you, who happen 
to be that son. You see? 

Silence for a time, then: Yes, I 
think so. Then, after another brief 
pause: This seems a funny thing 
for me to be worried about  but do 
you think theyll ever accept me? 
Lairds voice shook. 

Eventually, I imagine, when 
they understand what has hap- 
pened  when theyre told by some- 
one who can speak with authority. 
Keep your hopes up, but be 
patient  it may take a while. 

Ill do that, Laird said grimly, 
and thanks. But what did 
happen? 

Im afraid thats the question of 
the century. I wish I could answer 
it 

They were silent for the rest of 
the drive. An unfamiliar car was in 
Pearsalls driveway. He parked at 
the curb. He took his remaining 
luggage from the car and motioned 
for Laird to bring his, also. This 
time, at the door, he used his 
key  once inside, luggage and all, 
his position would be stronger. 

As they went through the hall to 
the living room he heard conversa- 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



19 




tion that broke off as they entered. 
Pearsall recognized the small, dark 
woman with Glenna. 

It was Glenna who spoke. 
Youre back, I see. Her voice 
was stiff and forced, close to the 
breaking point. Well, maybe you 
can explain to Ludmilla here, 
where her husband is. Shes been 
asking me  and of course I dont 
know. 

I dont understand, Pearsall 
began  but suddenly he did under- 
stand and realized he should have 
foreseen the complication. 

Ludmilla Frantiszek rose and 
faced him. Her hands were 
clenched tightly across her chest. 
The heavy black braid that fell for- 
ward over her left shoulder to her 
waist swayed with the slow ago- 
nized shaking of her head. 

Where is Miro? Her voice was 
low and ragged. What have you 
done with my husband, you dead 
man who walks? 

She stared blankly at him. 

Pearsall tried to answer, but 
could say only, Milla   

Aw, you know me, do you? I 
knew you, too. And Miro knew 
you. We grieved at your funeral. 
And then Miro was gone a long 
eight months with Hawk Flight . I 
was not here when Hawk Flight re- 
turned I was with my troupe in 
London, dancing. You remember 
that I am a dancer? 



Yes, Milla. And a very good 
one. 

Yes, she nodded. That is 
true  I am. When I heard, I re- 
turned. To the port. Hawk Flight's 
crew was gone, scattered to reunite 
with families for three days. They 
will be back on Tuesday, the fat- 
faced man said. Pearsall nod- 
ded  he knew the one she meant. 

But Miro, he said,/ has not 
come back. Instead there is you, 
who are dead. Tell me  you must 
tell me! How can this happen? 

Milla  Milla, I dont know. 
Miro was not on Hawk Flight with 
me. Hed broken a leg skiing and 
was grounded while it healed. I 
took his place  he stayed at home. 
And somehow I have returned to a 
world in which youve seen me 
dead and Miro, not I, left on Hawk 
Flight as first officer. Thats all I 
know Milla. Its not much help, but 
its true. 

Black eyes wide under furrowed 
brow, she gazed at him as if trying 
to memorize him cell by cell. Fi- 
nally she nodded. I believe you. I 
dont understand all you say, but I 
never knew you to lie, Woody, 
while you were ^alive. She was 
trying not to cry, but could not stop 
her tears. I will go now. 

^She turned away. Pearsall 
moved toward her but Laird waved 
him back and took her arm, guid- 
ing her out. He did not return im- 



20 



IF 




mediately. Pearsall decided he was 
making sure she was in fit condi- 
tion to drive before letting her go. 

if'T'HEN I was right, Glenna 
** said, suddenly breaking si- 
lence. Youre not my Woody at 
all, are you? Youre some kind of 
Woody Pearsall, all right, but you 
never saw me before today. Nor I, 
you. Youre a close match. I can't 
see any differences yet  maybe I 
never will. But youre simply 
not  my Woody! 

Tears welled  it was Pearsalls 
night for weeping ladies. 

Oh, I wish you were! 

He passed off the thought that 
her wish, literally taken, would 
make him dead he knew her true 
meaning. So do I, my dear, he 
said. You have no idea how much 
I wish it. 

She ignored his words. I should 
have known  I did know  when 
you said Id cut my hair. Because I 
havent worn it long for nearly six 
years. I cut it when I had the role of 
Helen in that play  what was the 
name of it? I cant remember   
Pearsall couldnt recall. her ever 
acting in any play at all. And 
somehow I never got around to 
growing it long again. Though I 
should, really. But you didnt 
know. So you cant be my Woody, 
can you? 

She asked the question as though 



it had an answer, so he gave her the 
best he had. No, Im not, he 
said. And youre not quite my 
Glenna, either. But   and now for 
the first time he moved and 
touched her, took her by the shoul- 
ders to hold her facing him  we 
are each the best  the best Woody 
and the best Glenna  that either of 
us is ever going to find. 

She came to him and clung, sob- 
bing, but by the feel of her he knew 
it was still no good between them. 

At least, he thought, she had ac- 
cepted him as a friend. 

Ill 

P EARSALL and Glenna shared 
the same bedroom that 
night  Laird had the guest 
room  but not the same bed. 
Lying awake, he heard her slow, 
sleeping breath. He had steeled 
himself to being aroused and frus- 
trated by her nearness, but within 
him no Excitements stirred  he 
was as much disappointed as re- 
lieved. The thought came to him 
that his need to establish identity 
was stronger than his need for sex. 
When on a mission he schooled 
himself to celibacy. Some men and 
women formed shipboard liai- 
sons  he did not. Early on he had 
considered the idea  but apart 
from Glennas unorthodox monog- 
amist convictions he felt the plea- 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



21 




sures did not compensate for the 
risk of jealousies and impaired mo- 
rale. He took no moralistic posi- 
tion, but felt that as a ships officer 
it was unwise for him to invite pos- 
sible trouble. 

At home, though, his urges were 
strong dnd frequent, not much di- 
minished by age. And so were 
Glennas  in the world he remem- 
bered they were well matched. 

He had to get away from that 
thought. Instead he considered 
what Glenna had said after Laird 
had returned from seeing Ludmilla 
Frantiszek safely on her way. 

Admiral Forgues called, she 
had told them, ~just before Milla 
came here. Everyone from Hawk 
Flight is to report back to duty to- 
morrow morning. 

Sunday? 

Yes. He said* its important. 

Im sure it is. I wonder if 
it's really everyone , he thought, he 
wants there tommorow  or only 
me 

Wonder what, Woody? 

He hadnt answered her. Any- 
thing he could have said would 
have sounded as paranoid as he had 
begun to feel. 

Now, lying alone as though he 
were on the ship and Glenna light- 
years away instead of a mere few 
feet, he still wondered. 

Sleep came eventually, much 
later than he wished. 



Next morning Glenna was cheer- 
ful in an impersonal way, as she 
served the two men breakfast. Ill 
expect you both home for dinner, 
she said, so call me if you cant 
make it. And do let me know if you 
learn  well, anything that explains 
anything, wont you? 

Of course, Glenna. He wanted 
to say more, but it was no time to 
crowd his luck. Besides, Laird was 
there. 

Laird looked more at peace with 
himself. The nights sleep must 
have helped. He said little, but 
smiled occasionally. 



A T THE spaceport he took a 
shortcut to the Administration 
Building  rather, to where he re- 
membered it to be. The building 
wasnt there. In its place stood an 
old dilapidated warehouse. 

Now he remembered  the soar- 
ing tower he had looked for and 
hadnt seen when he had been mak- 
ing his landing approach, was the 
new Administration building. He 
should have known before he had 
ever touched ground that this was 
not his world. 

He stopped the car and searched 
through memory. 

- Whats the matter? asked 
Laird. 

Nothing. Well, yes  something 
is, in a way. John, do you remem- 



22 



IF 




ber the Ad Building and its tower? 

Of course. Why? 

Well, this is where it was. Now 
it isnt. Let me think a minute. 
Well have to find the old building, 
the one our Space Service tore 
down, 

Lairds face went blank. He 
blinked rapidly several times. Pear- 
sall shook his head  just now he 
couldnt afford to worry about 
Laird. 

The old building had been va- 
cated two or three years ago  he 
should be able to remember. Yes, 
he knew where to go. 

He was right. The building that 
he had seen razed was where it had 
been. He parked and used an elbow 
to nudge laird. Come on, John. 
The admiral doesnt like to be kept 
waiting.? 

Inside the building Pearsall said, 
Hawk Flight   at each check- 
point and was passed through to 
Forgues receptionist without hav- 
ing to show identification. One 
desk removed from the admirals 
presence he repeated the name and 
added: Where do we go? 

You are? The girl was blond 
and pretty. A blue eye, her left, 
that aimed slightly outward, ac- 
cented her piquancy. It would be 
unwise of her, thought Pearsall, to 
correct that defect. 

First Officer Pearsall, he said. 
And pointing a thumb at his com- 



panion, Navigator third John I- 
forget-the-initial Laird. Were a 
little late. Where do we go, 
please? 

Oh  yes, sir. The small confer- 
ence room just off the admirals of- 
fice, to your right. You know it? 
Yes. Thank you. He guided 
Laird along. They entered the 
room. 

From his seat at the end of the 
long table, Forgues peered up at 
them. At first look his head always 
seemed too large for his small 
frame, but Pearsall was accus- 
tomed to the discrepancy and ad- 
justed automatically. A quick 
count told him that he and Laird 
were the last to arrive. The dead, 
stuffy air of the drab room was 
heavy with anxiety. 

Sorry were late, sir, said 
Pearsall. No excuses. But I think 
I have part of the answer to some 
of the questions youll be asking.  v 
No doubt, was the dry-toned 
answer. Youre an intelligent 
man. You must have reached the 
same conclusions we have. 

I dont understand. I 
thought   

You thought you were the only 
odd fish in the soup. Please find a 
seat, Commander  you too, 
Laird  and well get down to it. 
Confused but alert, Pearsall sat. 
Lets not waste time, Forgues 
began. Ive heard some of your 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



23 




stories. I believe them. Well get to 
your individual problems a little 
later. 

About six hours after you dis- 
embarked I knew as a certainty 
that your ship was not the Hawk 
Flight we sent out eight months 
ago. Unfortunately, Commander 
Pearsall, I did not have this knowl- 
edge when I spoke to you at your 
home. But moments later tbe 
maintenance crew ran into a few 
problems  some of their testing 
procedures wouldnt work. It took 
us a while to find out why, but 
when we did the answers told us a 
great deal. 

Shortly before Hawk Flight left 
this port, the labs sent us a new set 
of modifications to improve con- 
trol efficiency. I put crews on over- 
time and got the work done in time__ 
for liftoff. Ourrepair crews prob- 
lem turned out to be that on your 
ship these changes had not been 
made. We checked and found that 
the departure date in your log is 
three days earlier than our records 
show. It is not the same ship  you 
are not the same people. There 
have been a number of repercus- 
sions  

P EARSALL saw a small, iri- 
descent, green insect crawling 
along the upper edge of the admi- 
rals collar, never quite touching 
his neck. Unable to look away 



from the little tightrope-walker, he 
felt akin to it  he wanted it to 
survive. 

We have, said Forgues, three 
gross anomalies. Commander 
Pearsall, who was dead before 
Hawk Flight undertook its mis- 
sion, is now returned alive to us. 
My congratulations, Commander. 
Commander Miro Frantiszek was 
first officer of the Hawk Flight I 
know  your records show he was 
never aboard. And ours make no 
mention of Navigator Third John 
Laird, who is indisputably present. 

Of the remaining twenty- 
two  many of you have encoun^ 
tered problems of your own. If you 
wish to discuss any of these, now 
would be a good time. He looked 
around the table. Prentice? 

Second Officer Miles Prentice 
rose  a tall man, stooped and 
lean  and spoke in a low, intense 
voice. I went to my a d- 
dress  someone else lives there. 
When I finally found my wife, she 
said weve been divorced more than 
three years. Shes remarried and 
has two new children. I dont know 
what to do, Shaking his head, he 
sat down again,, 

Forgues looked at him but said 
nothing. He acknowledged a raised 
Jiand. Chandri?* 

I was married, too. But now I 
find that my wife  I said goodbye 
to her only eight months ago  has 




been dead nearly five years. Its in- 
sane, thats all. Or I am. 

Youre not, said the admiral. 
Only misplaced. 

The testimony continued. Geh- 
ring  Lena Gehring. I was a 
widow with a son in boarding 
school, a married daughter and a 
grandson. Now Im a childless 
spinster. Id rather be dead. 

Cheng here, second pilot. Last 
year my wife and I moved to a new 
house  but somehow it turns out 
we didnt. Nothing else is much 
different. 

Johnson. I was a bachelor, but 
now I seem to have a wife and two 
kids. Im not complaining  I like 
it. 

Lightfoot. I drew good cards. 
My husband was a hopeless 
drunk  and I do mean hopeless. 
Here hes been dry for the last four 
years. 

Ramirez. I went home. It 
wasnt my place and never has 
been. My wife's folks never heard 
of me and she*s married to some- 
body else. So I looked myself up in 
the directory. I have a wife I never 
saw before. It's a little scary, but I 
think it'll work out okay  she's 
pretty nice. 

Timon  Aldred Timon. There 
are some minor differences but 
nothing serious. It doesnt bother 
me any. 

Parelli, it says on the roster. I 



have a different husband but I 
probably would anyway by this 
time, even if Id stayed home. I al- 
ways seem to marry the wrong 
type. I think maybe this one is a 
little better than average. 

Im Red Sarchet, drive tuner. I 
live with my folks, like always. But 
down at the corner bar they all let 
on I was one of the gay guys. Im 
not  I dont have anything against 
them, but Im not. I had to fight 
one fellow. Im not going back 
there. 

Gerard, communications. I 
didnt have anybody before and I 
still dont. I live in a new place. 
Whats the difference? 

Vaille, captain. I found some 
problems to be worked out, but 
nothing insurmountable. 

On and on it went, all through 
the twenty-two. One short, fat man 
said only, I pass. Looking at 
him, Pearsall recalled his name, 
Crawford, and his job, supply 
clerk. Nothing more came to mind, 
from eight months on the same 
ship. 

Poor Crawford , he thought. 

The consensus was almost evenly 
divided between those adjusting 
successfully to the changes and 
those finding them from distressing 
to intolerable. What could anyone 
do for Chandri or Gehring? 

Forgues muttered into the inter- 
com  the pretty blonde came al- 



PE A RSALL'S RETURN 



25 




most immediately with a big pot 
and a tray of cups. As the coffee 
ritual began the admiral spoke 
again. 

Your attention, please. The 
green insect was gone. Pearsall 
hadnt seen it go, didnt know 
whether or not it was still circum- 
navigating the admiral. For what 
help it might be, Ill tell you as 
much ar I understand of what has 
happened. 

It seems we didnt know 
enough about the Skip Drive. Of 
course the press stories, that it 
beats lightspeed by going through 
hyperspace, are a lot of horse 
puckie  theres no such thing as 
hyperspace. But all we had to 
know  in operations  was that it 
works. It took us there and it 
brought us back. For ten years, on 
the shorter hauls our power sources 
could handle, we had no trouble. 
So last year when we got the Krie- 
ger power units, we pushed perfor- 
mance as high as we could. 

Now, I had a two-hour lecture 
last night, by a top man from the 
labs. I wont take two hours to tell 
you, because I didnt understand 
that much of it. But Ill tell you the 
parts I did get. 

T HE little bug reappeared, sit- 
ting like a tiny epaulette on the 
admirals left shoulder. Pearsall 
was glad to see it. 



The trick is that space and time 
are quantized. If you dont know 
what that means, wait and ask me 
later. Mainly, the universe doesn't 
exist continuously. It pul- 
sates  appears and disappears at a 
rate much too high to measure. So 
when you move you do it by van- 
ishing at one point and reappearing 
at the next  normally. 

Ordinarily, in moving we hit ev- 
ery point along the way. Skip Drive 
suppresses our appearances at 
most of those points. We beat 
lightspeed because its the ins and 
outs that use up time and energy, 
not the motion itself. 

Excuse me, sir. It was Captain 
Vaille who spoke. Was it ex- 
plained how the relativistic effects 
are avoided? Thats one.thing Ive 
never understood and it bothers 
me. 

I cant give you the math for it, 
Captain   Vaille smiled and 
shook his head  but the way Dr. 
Kunda at the labs put it, velocity 
has to do with the number of ap- 
pearances, not the distance be- 
tween them. So at a Skip-factor of 
ten your theoretical limit is ten 
lights, not one. And of course we 
never push that limit  our in- 
struments are redlined at ten per 
cent time-mass variation, which 
weve found acceptable. 

Nice, isnt it? We thought we 
had the universe by its short hairs. 



26 



IF 




So we sent you out at top Skip-f ac- 
tor  well over a thousand, I be- 
lieve  and instead of coming back 
to where you once belonged you 
came here instead. 

Kunda told me why. There are 
more worlds than one  more than 
we could count, I expect. There 
have to be  to explain whats hap- 
pened. They run side-by-side in 
time and ordinarily you stay in 
your own rut  no way to get out of 
it. But on high Skip-factor, with 
the checkpoints fewer and farther 
between, so to speak, you can drift 
into a new and different set of 
probabilities. The higher and 
longer you Skip the farther you 
may drift from the world you 
know. Thats why youre here in- 
stead of there. 

And you cant get back. 
Huh? 

Why? 

Why not? 

Several people were speaking at 
once. Pearsall remained quiet. And 
the little green insect had vanished 
again. 

You could try, said Forgues. 
go out again and take your 
chances. But youd probably find a 
set of circumstances even more 
strange to you. effects on any one 
trip appear to be random, but may 
well be cumulative. You might 
come closer to your original 
world then again, you might not. 



The odds arent necessarily favor- 
able. In fact, indications point to 
the contrary. 

Then where do we stand? 
someone demanded. What are we 
supposed to do? 

I dont know, Forgues said. 
His voice was flat, deliberate. 
When I do. Ill be sure to inform 
you. 

Pearsall spotted his small green 
friend. It had flown, while he 
wasnt looking, to a window ledge. 
He felt himself released from an 
anxiety he hadnt consciously 
noticed. 

Sir, he said, is there anything 
more for us to do here, now? Or 
may we leave? 

As Forgues began to answer, the 
door opened. The fey-eyed recep- 
tionist failed to block the entrance 
of the aide Pearsall had seen on his 
picturephone. The chubby man 
spoke. 

Admiral, sir, a ship has 
landed. 

Pearsall thought Forgues would 
explode into harangue, but he said, 
level-toned, Thank you, Abbott, 
for the information. But ships land 
here quite often, I believe. This is 
an important conference. Why did 
you interrupt it? 

Sir, I thought you might want 
to know immediately about this 
particular landing. The ship is 
Hawk Flight 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



27 




IV 

F ORGUES broke the intent sil- 
lence. Is it ours this time? 

It seems to be  or as near as 
makes no difference. At least the 
roster checks out. And the time of 
departure. 

Forgues sighed. My friends, it 
seems we have a whole new ball 
game. I have no idea how to cope 
with it. I welcome any suggestions. 
Just a minute, sir, said Pear- 
sall. He turned to the chubby news- 
bearer. Are all crew members 
alive and well? 

Yes, they are, the man said. 
Why? 

Excuse me, Admiral. Without 
waiting for a response, Pearsall 
walked into the receptionists of- 
fice, closing the door gently. 

May I use your phone? The 
girl nodded. He punched the re- 
membered number  after a few 
seconds a picture lighted. 

The womans eyes were swollen 
but dry. Her black mass of hair 
swung loose. Her right hand held a 
brush. 

Milla, he said. The other 
Hawk Flight has landed, the one 
that belongs here*. Miro has come 
home. 

The brush dropped unnoticed. 
Her eyes filled. She smiled like a 
very young child seeing the antics 
of clowns. Miro? Miro! Oh, how 



wonderful! You have just learned?" 

About thirty seconds ago. I 
called you, first thing. 

Oh, thank you. Woody  thank 
you! You have seen him? 

Not yet. But all crew members 
are reported alive and well. 
Shall I come there? 

I  I dont know Milla. Does 
Miro usually call from the port, 
when he lands? 

Yes. Always. 

Then Im sure he will now, as 
soon as he can. Why dont you wait 
for his call, then decide between 
you where to meet? 

Yes, that is best. Though wait- 
ing will be very hard. 

Yes, Milla  I know. But its 
not for long now. My God , he 
thought  she looks ten years 
younger. Look, Milla  Id better 
get off this line so Miro can get 
through to you as soon as he has 
the chance. And Im very happy for 
you. 

Yes. Thank you. I hope also for 
your happiness. And now, 
goodbye. 

Shutting off the phone, Pearsall 
thanked the receptionist for its use 
and returned to the conference 
room. It stank of desperation. 

Has anything been decided? 
he said. 

Where the hell have you been, 
Pearsall? Forgues snapped. 
Telling Ludmilla Frantiszek 



28 



IF 




she has her husband back, sir. I 
thought somebody should. 

Oh, yes  yes, of course! Sorry, 
Pearsall. Glad you thought of it. 
Its all right, sir. Does anyone 
know what comes next? 

Not so youd notice it. The 
other crew should be through medi- 
cal check before much longer. Ill 
have to talk to them, explain the 
situation  I suppose theyve heard 
a garbled version from someone 
and are feeling anxious, to say the 
least. 

Forgues scowled. I should have 
thought of that and issued instruc- 
tions. 

When? asked Pearsall. Beg- 
ging your pardon, but none of us 
anticipated this landing until it 
happened  and then the first 
people to talk with the ship would 
naturally let out the whole story. 
What? The admiral's pre- 
occupation was evident. Oh, yes, 
youre right. He rapped on the 
table for the groups attention. 
Well, Id better give the situation 
readout as I see it. He looked 
around at all of them. For some 
of you this new development must 
be one blow too many. Having to 
readjust to living someone else's 
life was bad enough, terrible in 
some cases. And now the someone 
else has come to take up his or her 
own life and you must live with 
that, too: 



He sighed and shook his head/ 
One thing is clear  your careers 
are secure. Youre all competent 
people in your own right. Despite 
the fact that someone else now 
shares your name there will be a 
place for you. Well find a wy to 
straighten out the records. You 
neednt worry about any of that. 
Ill take care of it. 

He frowned. Now, your per- 
sonal lives. Each case will need its 
own unique solution, I expect. 
Some of you may have to give up 
your families  and no help for it. 
Or your alter-ego may want out of 
his current life situation and bow 
out in your favor  its not impos- 
sible, but dont count on it, Or 
some of you  and your doubles 
and. your families, might agree to 
share your lives  multiple mar- 
riages arent common, but they are 
legal. And it could be arranged for 
any pair of doubles to ship out al- 
ternately, if that would help. The 
service will make counseling avail- 
able to any who feel the need for it. 
Dont hesitate to ask. Ill see that 
the red tape is bypassed. Forgues 
looked at his watch. Please re- 
main here while I speak to the 
other crew. Ill arrange for lunch to 
be brought in. Then I want to be 
present at the first meeting of each 
pair of doubles, in privacy  maybe 
I can help you accept each others 
existence a little more easily. 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



29 




I realize the procedure will be 
time-consuming, but at the mo- 
ment I cant think of a better one. 
Your welfare is my responsibility 
and I intend to discharge that re- 
sponsibility as best I can. Thats all 
I have to say at this time. Ill have 
somebody hustle that lunch for 
you. 

Sir, said Pearsall. Laird and 
I have no doubles to meet. But we 
do have personal problems of our 
own, each of us. May we have your 
permission to leave now? 

What? Oh, yes. And Frantis- 
zek, in the other crew. Ill call and 
have him released if Abbott hasnt 
thought to do so which I doubt. 
The admiral turned to leave. As 
Pearsall and Laird followed him 
out, they paused to wave restrained 
goodbyes. In a way Pearsall felt 
like a deserter but what more 
could he do here? He hurried to 
catch up with Forgues. 

When do you want us back 
here, sir? 

Tomorrow morning. No, make 
it after lunch. I may be up most of 
the night with those twenty-two 
pairs of doppelgangers  and Ill 
need some sleep. 

They parted. Outside, Pearsall 
noticed a new gouge along the. side 
of the drab little rental car. Some 
things never change, he 
thought  he remembered his 
grandfather complaining about 



damned idiots in parking lots. 
And throughout most of his child- 
hood young Elwood thought 
idiots were strange creatures 
who lurked in parking lots and 
lived only to ravage the cars of in- 
nocent grandfathers. 

The vagrant memory eased his 
tension. He found himself smiling. 



T HE morning drive had been 
hectic. Homeward bound he 
drove more leisurely, wondering 
what he could do or say to help his 
cause with Glenna. Not much, he 
decided she had all the pieces and 
would have to put them together 
herself. Neither he nor Laird spoke 
during the drive. He didnt know 
what the boy was thinking and, just 
then, he didnt want to know. Hed 
think about Lairds problem later 
and help if he could. 

Before they reached home he 
was sweating  the morning had 
been cool, but now it was past noon 
and Indian-summer hot. Hed have 
to take time, he thought, to turn in 
this rental contraption and get his 
own car out of storage. 

Glenna greeted the two men 
cheerfully enough. She wore light- 
weight halter and x briefs in a color- 
ful print pattern. Pearsall went 
straight to the refrigerator and was 
pleased to find a pitcher of daiqui- 
ris cooling, as in earlier, happier 



30 



IF 




times. He took a little in a glass 
and sipped it, before taking a cool 
shower and changing into shorts 
and sandals. 

Glenna, when he rejoined her, 
was setting out cold cuts and salad. 
The sound of running water from 
the basement shower indicated that 
Laird was also cooling off. Pearsall 
poured himself a full glass from the 
pitcher and sipped from it between 
bites of cheese, liverwurst, salad 
and crackers. He kept the silence 
until she broke it. 

Woody  Laird told me what 
happened. 

That Hawk Flight came back? 
The one that belongs here? "" 

Yes. Why didnt you tell me? 
And what does it mean? What hap- 
pens now? 

I wanted us to take our time 
talking about it. And I needed that 
cold shower first. Mind? She 
shook her head. Well, first it 
means that most of my crew have 
doubles and may be excess baggage 
on this world. He summarized 
Forgues conclusions, then added: 
Tomorrow, after hes talked with 
all the pairs, well have a better 
idea of how theyre reacting. Its 
not going to be easy for most, Im 
afraid. 

She was rubbing a knuckle 
alongside her nose, looking steadily 
over it. But, then Miro Frantiszek 
is back. Does Milla know? 



I called her immediately, as 
soon as we heard. 

Yes  you would. You were al- 
ways thoughtful  in my world. 
He had to speak. It seemed that 
I  that my Hawk Flight  ever 
since we landed, had been doing 
nothing but make people unhappy. 
I guess I jumped at the chance to 
make somebody happy for a 
change. I think it did me as much 
good as it did Milla. 

He touched his cold glass to his 
right ear  the chill was refreshing. 
Changing hands, he gave the other 
ear the same treatment and grinned 
at Glenna. She began to smile back 
at him. The door chime inter- 
rupted. 

Ill get it. She rose and went to 
the door. From where he sat, Pear- 
sall couldnt see whom she greeted. 

Yes, hes here. Please come 
in. What did they want with him 
now? But into the room Glenna 
ushered Bonita and Irene Laird. 

H E STOOD and saw them 
seated, offered and served 
drinks, returned to his own chair. 
The two Lairds werent talking, so 
Pearsall took the plunge. Youre 
here to see John? He should be 
coming soon. Hes been showering, 
but the water stopped running a 
minute ago. 

Mrs. Laird leaned forward. 
The problem was my husband. 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



31 




yi>u sec  not me. This thing is like 
a superstition or something with 
him. I wouldn't have turned young 
John away  he needed us. I could 
see that. She rubbed her hands to- 
gether. But my husband  hes 
John* too, of course; I suppose Fd 
get used to that  he wouldnt have 
it. Charles and Mildred never could 
stand up to him any more than I 
can, except just once in a while. 
James and Irene have all the family 
spunk. She smiled tentatively and 
fell silent. 

Yes, Mrs. Laird? said Pear- 
sall. Go on. 

Well. After you left Irene 
wouldnt let it go. She just kept 
on  didnt you, honey? The girl 
blushed and nodded. I agreed 
with her that we should have taken 
the boy in, .but John  my 
John never listens to me unless I 
throw a fit and a set of dishes. 
Well  not quite that bad, really. 
Usually things arent important 
enough and I let him have his way. 
This time, though, I stood with 
Irene. Any time she ran out of 
steam I came in for her. But still 
my John wouldnt have it. Now 
she sat upright. Then James 
called on the phone. It was late by 
then. Hed seen the news about 
Hawk Flight and the John Laird 
who wasnt on the records. They 
showed a picture of him and told 
his address on v the ships 



books our address. So James J 
called us, even that late. 1 

What did he say? If he could 1 
keep her talking, Pearsall thought, J 
sooner or later shed get to the *4 
point. Jji* 

He asked had we seen the news? J 
My John said wed seen more than | 
that the man had come here | 

rs 

saying were his family. James 1 
asked, well, where is he? John said 
hed sent him packing. And James 
called his father some names  very 
disrespectful, James was. 

Pearsall raised his glass to hide a 
grin. And then what happened? 
James said he didnt < under-r 
stancP it, but when he saw young 
Johns picture his spine went cold. 
That he knew he couldnt ever have 
seen him before, but he felt he rec- 
ognized him. Then he said if We 
didnt take the boy in, he would. 
And I said, good for them. 
Irene spoke for the first time. Her 
voice was low and clear. And I 
asked James did they have room 'j 
for me, too? 

Thats right, honey  you did. 
And right there I had enough. T 
love my John, but sometimes I 
shouldnt say" it, though its 
true  hes a pigheaded fool! Id 
carried a son nine months, I said, 
and lost him  a woman never gets 
over that. Now somehow I had a 
chance to get him back alive and 
Id be eternally damned if anyone 



32 



IF 




Science fictions 
premier magazine 
goes into 
monthly orbit... 
to doubleyour 
reading pleasure! 





Not since his epic, 2001: A Space 
Odyssey, has Clarke created a 
story of such scope and suspense 
 as an unidentified mass hurtles 
toward Earth, bearing within it the 
seeds of a strange new world. 

Dont miss the world premiere 
of Rendezvous with Rama. The 
science fiction event of this or any 
year. Starting this September in 
the new , monthly GALAXY. 



Only GALAXY brings you so 
much new fiction by modem mas- 
ters like Anderson, Asimov, Bloch, 
Bradbury, Clarke, del Rey, Hein- 
lein, Pohl, Siiverberg, Sturgeon, 
Van Vogt. 

And now GALAXY goes month- 
ly  doubling the. number of issues 
it will deliver each year to science 
fiction connoisseurs . like you! 




was going to take that chance away 
from me! We argued late, to 
daylight  didnt get up until noon 
today. John missed work, first day 
in years. But he finally agreed last 
night and stands by it today. He 
still complains a little but thats 
just show  he does hate to lose an 
argument. So here we are, Irene 
and I if the boy still wants any- 
thing to do with us. 

Pearsall walked back along the 
hall to the basement door across 
from the kitchen. He shouted down 
the stairs. 

Laird. John Laird, get your 
lazy carcass up here. Youre going 
home. 

Yes, I know. Coming from 
the kitchen, behind Pearsall, the 
voice sounded thick, as though is- 
suing from a constricted throat. I 
heard. 

r T HE Lairds, all three, had gone. 

Pearsall felt wrung out. Into a 
short glass he poured bourbon over 
ice  daiquiris were all well and 
good, but at the moment he wanted 
a little more bite. 

Well, thats two happy endings 
today. His voice and smile were 
gentle. Care to try for three? 

Glenna stiffened noticeably. 
Woody, I cant take that  not 
just now. Couldnt you have 
waited? I was coming to like 
you  I do like you  but now 



youve brought it all back. That 
youre not my real husband. 

Your real husband is dead. 
Maybe a little shock treatment 
would work. You saw him 
dead  you said so. Now tell me 
 hadnt you ever thought of 
remarrying? Were you going to 
waste the rest of your life mooning 
over a rotting corpse? 

She shrank visibly into herself. 
Her face paled. He could see the 
light dusting of freckles normally 
masked by her healthy coloring. 

I  I might have remarried. I 
had no one in mind, but of course 
Ive thought of it. But not like 
this  youre asking me simply to 
let you move in here in place of my 
Woody. Thats not remarriage. 
She shook her head. You know 
my beliefs, my monogamist up- 
bringing. You accepted all that 
when you married me. Didnt 
you? 

He overlooked the gaps in her 
logic. Yes, he thought, hed ac- 
cepted her views  perhaps more 
thoroughly than she knew. All 
right, hed play it her way. 

Well, then Glenna. will you 
marry me? 

No, I wont. Instant, level- 
voiced anger. Youre making fun 
of me. 

He took a deep breath and ex- 
haled carefully, stifling the words 
that would estrange her beyond re- 



34 



IF 




call. In his mind he rephrased what 
he would have to say next  win or 
lose. 

Glenna  isnt this all a bit pre- 
tentious? I mean, its not as though 
there had never been anyone else 
for you  besides the Woody who is 
dead. 

What do you mean? Gripping 
the arms of her chair, she started to 
rise. Of course there has been no 
one else. I came to you a vir- 
gin  dont you believe that now? 
You are surely mixing up your 
Woodys, now arent you? Yes  
certainly I believe it. Thats not 
what Im talking about. 

Then just what are you talking 
about? 

He sighed. All right. Id never 
intended to throw it up to 
you  never thought Id have 
to  but we both know you broke 
your own special rules after I had 
come to accept them. I knew about 
you and Piers Carlton when he was 
directing the Little Theater in 
Spring Harbor. 

She stood frozen, mute  he had 
to go on. It doesnt matter now, 
Glenna. After the miscarriage I 
could understand  you needed 
something I couldnt give you. And 
I judged that Carlton wasnt the 
sort who would ever be unkind to 
you. So Pendured it and never held 
it against you  until now, when 
you turn me away. 



Wide-eyed, she shook her head. 
But I didnt, Woody I didnt! 
No, listen  let me talk. I thought 
of it, yes  I played around with the 
idea. In a way it fascinated me. 
Youre right  I needed something. 
We had had all those years of hop- 
ing  and finally I was pregnant. 
And then the miscarriage and the 
doctor said I could never have the 
child Id come so close to having. I 
think I was a little crazy, Woody, 
for a while. And I did flirt with 
Piers Carlton  thats true. But he 
got me interested in the theater, in- 
stead. So ' then I found what I 
needed  but on the stage, not on 
the casting couch. 

It was Pearsalls turn to shake 
his head. Glenna, dont bother to 
lie to me. 

Lie? Im not lying! Why should 
I lie to a man Im rejecting? 

I have no idea. But, you see  I 
caught you. I came home and 
found you together on the bed. You 
didnt see or hear me  I went out 
again and stayed away until he was 
gone. Afterward, until I was sure it 
was over, I took care to give fair 
warning of my comings and goings 
and to make it easy for you to find 
excuses to meet him. 

She was frowning, intent. 
Why would you do that? 

JJE SHRUGGED. Im not 
--sure. I suppose  I thought 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



35 




youd be having enough problems 
with guilt without my piling shame 
on top of it. He was getting off the 
point  oh, yes! But another 
thing, Glenna  you were never in a 
play or on the stage in your life. 
Why do you try to tell me such 
things? 

She stared at him silently. Then 
she laughed  and laughed and' 
laughed. Finally she stopped and 
wiped her eyes. 

Oh, Woody! To paraphrase 
you  youre mixing up your 
Glennas. Your Glenna may have 
done all you say  since you say it 
Ill believe you. But I didnt. And I 
did act on the stage. I have my 
keepsakes, the theater programs. 
Would you like to see them? 

He was trying to comprehend, to 
absorb what she bad said. Id like 
to later, yes. But now Ill take your 
word for them, though what you 
tell me is hard to understand. But 
Im still interested in only one 
thing  where do we stand, you and 
I? 

A vertical crease formed and 
deepened between her brows. Sep- 
arately, Im afraid. She paused. 
You can sleep in the guest room 
tonight  now that Laird has 
gone but tomorrow youd better 
go somewhere else. Or Ill leave if 
you insist. I need to be apart from 
you. 

Why? 



Because we do mix up our 
Woodys and our Glennas. You 
think you know me, but you dont. 
And every time I come to feel that. 
I know you I find I dont, not at all. 
How many more pitfalls are there 
in our separate pasts that wed 
stumble into if we tried to make a 
future together? I dont know. And 
Im afraid to find out. 

Frustration bit at his nerves and 
muscles like electric shock, bring- 
ing him perilously near the edge of 
violence. He took a deep breath. 
Then, forcing himself to sit still 
while looking at his not-wife, he 
said, All right. Ill leave in the 
morning. Ill take my luggage and I 
wont be back. You can ship the 
rest of my stuff  anything thats 
still around here  when I have a 
place for it. Ill let you know and 
pay the freight. This place is yours. 
It was silly, Glenna, for you to of- 
fer to move out. 

No. Its only legally mine. You 
have as much right to everything as 
I do. 

But not to you? 

No  not to me. 

There was nothing he could say. 
He looked at his watch  it was 
mid-afternoon. Suddenly he 
couldnt face staying in this house 
through all the hours until dawn. 
He rose to his feet. 

I might as well gather my travel 
gear and go now, Glenna. 



36 



IF 




She stood, also. What do you 
plan to do? 

Ship out again, I suppose. He 
could still muster a grin. Next 
time I may come-back to a world 
Im better suited to. 

He was ready to leave in a few 
minutes. Awkwardly, encumbered 
by his three pieces of luggage, he 
paused in the living room. Silent 
and withdrawn, she looked up at 
him but did not speak. 

He made no move to set down 
the luggage or to touch her. 

Goodbye, Glenna. 

When she made no answer he 
started to move away. Then she 
said, Goodbye, Woody and 
looked away again. 

Outside, he stowed his gear in 
the car. He looked up at the broken 
chimney that someone else would 
have to repair. Then he slid under 
the wheel and drove toward the 
city. 

He registered at a hotel near the 
spaceport. He could have taken 
quarters at the port itself, but he 
didnt yet feel up to mingling with 
service personnel. He needed to be 
alone. 

He had dinner, but didnt eat 
much. He bought a book but, back 
in his room, read very little. He had 
a bottle, also, but drank sparingly. 
He went to bed early. 

It was the longest night hed ever 
known. 

PEARSALL'S RETURN 



E AWOKE dull-brained and 
heavy-eyed. A shower helped 
and the automatic routine of morn- 
ing soothed him. He rummaged for 
clean clothes  in some cases he 
was down to his last item. Some 
things were missing. Glenna must 
have laundered them, he thought 
and had forgotten to tell him. He 
dressed as best he could. 

In the hotels restaurant he had 
breakfast  steak and eggs, witty 
more black coffee than his nerves 
needed. 

Outside he felt the suns warmth, 
though it shone vaguely through 
ground haze. Two blocks away he 
found a store that carried clothing. 
He bought a few things he needed. 
He walked back to the hotel, got 
his duffel together and checked 
out. 

Through mists that lessened as 
the sun burned them away, he 
drove to the port. He registered for 
quarters and moved his luggage 
into a clean, featureless cubicle. He 
placed his shaving kit and some 
other trivia on the dresser top to 
identify the room for him next time 
he entered it. 

He looked at his watch: 1040. 
The Administration Building was 
less than two miles away  it would 
make a nice walk, he decided, and 
headed in that direction. 

At 1115 hours, wide-awake now 
but not overheated, he approached 

ii 





Admiral Forgues office. He rated 
a smile from the receptionist with 
the entrancingly off-track eye. She 
wore an electric-blue dress. With 
her pale skin and hair it made her 
look like a child playing grownup. 
Pearsall liked the ef- 
fect  momentarily he wished he 
could shed half his birthdays. 

Through the thin office door the 
admirals telephone voice rumbled 
unmistakably. Pearsall raised his 
eyebrows toward the sound. The 
girl nodded and he entered the ad- 
mirals presence just as Forgues 
said, Well, do it, then, and shut 
off the phone. 

Morning, Pearsall. Youre here 
early. 

Yes sir. Im anxious about 
some of our people and wondered 
how the interviews came out. If 
youre not busy 

Not especially. Most of the 
talks went faster than Id expected. 
I got almost enough sleep  as 
much as I usually get, anyway. 
Congratulations, sir. 

The situation is not as bad as I 
feared, Pearsall. To begin with, at 
Captain Vailles suggestion I had 
as many spouses and other family 
members brought here as I could 
reach on short notice. I included 
them iathe interviews once the ini- 
tial meetings were over. I think 
their presence helped a great deal 
in a number of cases. 



Vaille himself was no 
trouble  in either of his identities. 
When the two met, one said, Do 
you suppose our wife will agree 
that she cant have too much of a 
good thing? They both 
laughed 'thea Mrs. Vaille came 
in. At first it bothered her that she 
couldnt tell them apart, so your 
Vaille took scissors and trimmed 

his mustache short. Then she re- 

/ 

laxed and rapport between the 
three was good. In fact, I prevailed 
upon them to stay for the rest of 
the interviews and I think their ex- 
ample was of help to others who 
were less secure. 

Yes, sir  thats the captain, all 
right. He doesnt talk much, stays 
out of the limelight  but hes never 
at a loss. 

True. Well, then, not to bog 
you dowrf with details  eight other 
triangular households are launched 
successfully, including three with 
the wife duplicated. In six cases 
your shipmate was displaced by his 
or her twin and in three the other 
crewman was displaced. Leav- 
ing  let me see   he referred to a 
scribbled list  four pairs of 
twins who, forgone reason or an- 
other, are quite adrift in this world. 
So we have seventeen who are ef- 
fectively displaced persons. I hope 
we can find some way to help 
them. Forgues scowled. No, I 
forgot  make that sixteen. Your 



38 



IF 




version of Lena Gehring killed her- 
self during the night. Im 
sorry  did you know her well? 

Shaking his head, Pearsall felt a 
pang. He hadnt known her at all. 
If he had, could he have helped? 

But youd better make it sev- 
enteen again, sir, he said. I 
qualify. 

Oh? Forgues raised his eye- 
brows, started to speak, but shook 
his head and began again? Sorry 
to hear that. And how about young 
Laird? 

Hell be all right. The family 
decided to give him a try. 

Good. And Frantiszeks in safe 
harbor, too. The only problem is 
that I cant reach him  hes dis- 
connected his phone. 

Pearsall laughed. I cant say I 
blame her. 

What? Oh, yes  of course. 
Well, thats the wrapup. Unfortu- 
nately I cant do much about the 
loose ends just now  theyve sad- 
dled me with another insoluble 
problem. 

Another, sir? 

The courier ships  were those 
on the boards in your world before 
you left? 

Hmmm  yes, sir. Little two- 
person cans, werent they? With 
Skip-factors into five or six fig- 
ures the idea was to provide 
faster communications between 
here and the colonies. And expedite 



the high-priority small cargo. 

Thats right. Well, the ships are 
built  almost ready to deliver. We 
put a lot of money into that 
project. And now we cant use the 
damned things! 

Cant use them? Oh, of 
course  I see. 

Yes. Wholl pilot a ship that 
cant come home again? And what 
good are messages to an alternate 
world? 

After a moment, Pearsall did 
see. Oh, God, how he saw! Sir  I 
think  your two problems solve 
each other! 

Hows that? What do you 
mean? 

The difference between one 
world and another may be impor- 
tant to individuals, sir, but on the 
larger scale  politics, economics, 
commerce  it would be minor, 
even unnotioeable. Every version of 
Harpers Touchdown is going to 
need new counter-agents against 
the cyclic insect mutations, for in- 
stance. And  well, draw your own 
examples, sir  you have more data 
on the colonies than I do. And 
communications dealing with over- 
all problems rather than individual 
ones will still be valid  especially if 
the first messages explain the mul- 
tiple-world concept, to alert every- 
one to be on the lookout for dis- 
crepancies. If our thinking is 
careful, 'sir, the courier ships can do 



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



39 




almost exactly the job they were 
planned for. 

But who will run them? 

I will, for one  and probably 
most of your other displaced per- 
sons will volunteer. You see  its 
our only chance to find a world we 
can live in. 

But, Pearsall  you know how 
little chance you have of finding 
what you have lost. 

Yes, sir  I do know. But, what 
about a woHd in which I have no il- 
lusory ties that dont really work? 
Where I never met Glenna and 
never will? In a world like that I 
could feel free to make a new start. 
Here I cant. 

For a time Forgues was silent. 
Then: Yes  I see. But how do we 
run a courier system with seventeen 
people  seventeen who will work 
at it only until they find a place to 
call home? 

How many other ships  after 
Hawk Flight  went out long-haul 
at high Skip-factor and that arent 
back yet? And from how many 
worlds? Im afraid our seventeen 
are only the first of many. And 
think of this, too the possibilities 
of exchange of information be- 
tween worlds. It will be random, 
but over the long haul the law of 
averages will make it work. Too, 
youll find people attracted to the 
program for the adventure of it. 
Younger men particularly. 



Hmm  it might work. It just 
might, at that. For a time at least, 
until someone comes up with a bet- 
ter idea. He paused. Pearsall, 
before you go looking for yout bet- 
ter world I want you to help me get 
this thing organized. He stood. 
Now lets get on with our next 
conference. At least, thanks to you, 
I have something to say 
there  besides a lot of platitudes. 



ASHE followed Forgues, Pear- 
*^sall almost felt good. It wasnt 
every day, he thought, that a mere 
commander heard two sets of prob- 
lems from an admiral and handed 
him the answer to both  on a plat- 
ter, with an apple in its mouth. 
Yes, he felt almost good. 

The cute cockeyed blonde smiled 
up at him as he passed her desk. He 
returned the smile absently and 
continued in the admirals wake, 
but she called after him. 

Commander Pearsall? He 
turned. I have a message for 
you  please call your wife. You 
may use this phone if you like. 
He called to the departing admi- 
ral. Sir? Excuse me  Ill be along 
shortly. Forgues waved assent. 

What, thought Pearsall, could 
Glenna possibly have to say to him 
now? It had all been said. What 
further excuses, rationalizations, 
could she offer? He punched out 



40 



IF 




the number and waited until the 
screen lit. \ 

Woody? Her robe hung awry. 
Her hair was tousled. 

More or less, he answered. 
What do you want? 

I have to ask you something. 
After  after Carlton, were you and 
your Glenna happy together? 

He thought about it. Yes, I 
think we were. 

You were able to forgive her? 
You didnt resent what had 
happened? 

Of course I resented it  at 
first. Then I accepted it, and after 
that it didnt count any more either 
way  it was over and done with. 
But why do you ask? What differ- 
ence does it make? 

I couldnt sleep last night for 
thinking. My Woody  he was 
kind, like you, but not easily for- 
giving  I don't think he could have 
done what you did. That may be 
why I  didnt , after all  you see? 
For I might have lost him. Do you 
understand? 

No, Glenna. I dont think I do. 
What do you mean? 

I mean, come home. Woody! 
You were right  were the best 
Woody and Glenna we can find. 
Maybe an improvement on the 
originals. We can try, anyway! 
At first he couldnt 
breathe  and then he could. Yes, 
Glenna. I may be a little late for 



dinner, but Ill surely be there. 

Her smiling lips quivered. I can 
wait, she said and on the screen 
the picture died. 

For a moment he stood still, his 
mind worlds away. His own 
Glenna  there had never been any 
real chance of his finding his way 
back to her, but this decision made 
the separation final. So she was 
widowed. But this Glenna had sur- 
vived widowhood. 

How many worlds? How many 
Woody s and Gleonas  some with 
the right mates, some with the 
wrong? Some with none and maybe 
some Avith two. But for him and 
her, here  he shook his head and 
came back to one framework of 
time and space. 

The blonde looked quizzically at 
him, but Pearsall merely winked at 
her as he left. In the conference 
room a discussion was under way* 
Unceremoniously, he cut into it. 

Excuse- me, Admiral, he said. 
Your displaced-persons ros- 
ter  youll' have to cut it back to 
sixteen. Forgues raised eyebrows 
wavered between surprise and an- 
noyance at the interruption  then 
he grinned. Pearsall smiled back. 

Ill be glad to help initiate the 
courier program, sir, he said, but 
Im afraid I cant ride in it. Im 
taking no, chances of losing this 
world of yours. I seem to have 
found a home here.  



PEARSALL'S RETURN 



41 





Sure , the Eater was always 
hungry. But so were the 
poor things it devoured! 



STEPHEN TALL 

















I 

T HE call came to Red Spine 
and to the others of his shelter 
cluster as they rested deep in the 
cool corridors, insulated by many 
thicknesses of sand and soil from 
the harsh radiation of the blazing 
sun. It was the normal time of re- 
pose. But the call came and Red 
Spine and his fellows responded. 
Help was needed, help to save life. 
And life was sacred. 

The information is not good, 
Red Spine projected. Great 
masses of rock have closed the 
portals and smashed the corridors. 



Many have ceased to live. Red 
Spine spoke from his mind, from 
his thought centers. Since his pro- 
jection was open, it was detected 
by the many canceroids that 
formed the long line of slowly 
spinning beings that stretched out 
across the shimmering desert. 

It has always been a poor lo- 
cation for a shelter cluster, Yel- 
low Stripe said. The Scaling 
Hills have not been called the Scal- 
ing Hills for nothing. 

The mountains shook. Purple 
Fringes thought pulse came from 
far up near the head of the column. 
This has not happened for many 



43 




molts. There are projections of 
many beings in pain. 1 fear that 
there will be much food for the 
Eater. 

It, at least, will welcome 
tragedy, Red Spine murmured. 
To satisfy it becomes ever 
harder. Sometimes I wonder   
he left the thought unfinished. 

There was no response up and 
down the moving line. He knew 
that all had detected and had re- 
sponded, but their thoughts were 
shielded. It was always so when 
anyone spoke of the Eater. 

In his life span Red Spine had 
never seen so much death. Can- 
ceroids from shelter clusters all 
along the deserts edge toiled to- 
gether to remove the rock, to dig 
under the great slabs that could 
not be moved, a cold, steady, pas- 
sionless effort to free the un- 
fortunate victims of the shaking 
land. Yellow Stripe had observed 
truly. It had not been a good place 
for a shelter cluster. 

As the smashed bodies were re- 
moved, often piecemeal, they 
were laid aside neatly, in tidy 
piles. The piles, in turn, were 
steadily diminished by those who 
had elected to serve as bearers. 
Each individual did what seemed 
most to need doing, so there was 
order, though no being directed. 
Thus another line wound back 
across the desert toward the high- 



peaked, disklike hill in the dis- 
tance that was not a hill at all. 

There was communication. 
Meaningful patterns pulsed from 
thought center to thought center. 
Such was conversation as can- 
ceroids knew it, soundless, con- 
cise. And in every reception cen- 
ter another projection throbbed 
and hummed, dully, monotonous- 
ly. None answered it. It could not 
be answered by speech. It could 
only be interrupted or stilled by 
the carriers of the pieces of broken 
bodies. 

Food! Food! Food! 

The irritating, endless projec- 
tion of the Eater was a part of can- 
ceroid life. None could remember 
when it had not been there.. To feed 
the Eater was a responsibility of 
every canceroid. None contested 
it. None challenged it. It had al- 
ways been so. 

ED SPINE moved rock. His 
peaked carapace, a sturdy disk 
ten feet in diameter, thick and re- 
sistant, was balanced on sixteen 
pairs of armored walking ap- 
pendages. His cold stalked eyes 
peered from under heavy chitinous 
sheaths. He enjdyed his strength. 

Others dug sand. Still others 
carefully moved the living bodies 
as they were freed. If there was no 
vital hurt these would be removed 
to the corridors and repose cham- 



44 



IF 




bers of other shelter clusters. 
There they would sit and be fed by 
their hosts until they had 
regenerated all that had been in- 
jured or lost. The ruined shelter 
cluster would be dug and built 
again, with symbionts donated 
from other communities, but 
next time it would not be located 
where the mountains could fall on 
it. 

Cleanly, neatly, every scrap of 
broken body, every cast append- 
age, even the fragments of shat- 
tered carapaces were gathered up. 
All went to feed the Eater. There 
could be no wasting of biomass. 
It was becoming precious. But this 
time, at least, it was abundant. The 
Eater had bodies and more bodies, 
as many as even its capacious gut 
could welcome and digest. And 
after two days the telepathic 
mumble of its incessant food call 
slowly subsided and became still. 

The Eater is satisfied, Blue 
Dot projected. I do not ever 
remember this happing before. 
This is good. 

I am from an 1 earlier hatching 
than you, Red Spine said. I re- 
member an earlier time. And it is 
not good. 

How can it not be good? The 
flesh is dead. Only life is sacred. If 
the Eater is filled, we do not have 
to feed it. To me, that is very 
good. 



Watch. If I am wrong, I will 
correct my statement. When the 
Eater calls for food again, life will 
be harder. Watch. 

With all the food, the vast 
mound that was the Eater became 
torpid. In the memory of the 
oldest canceroid it had never 
walked, for its nourishment was 
supplied -at its mouth opening and 
its wastes were removed from be- 
hind it. But now, under its thick 
and radiation-scarred carapace, 
on which lichens and sponge 
masses grew tall and dense, 
changes were taking place. Its in- 
credible expanses of tissue filled 
with fluids  it writhed and shifted 
for half a day. Then the whole 
great skeleton ripped asunder. A 
red, pulsing, monstrous thing 
crept feebly from it, pulling limp 
appendages from the rigid 
cylinders that had protected them. 
It dragged itself clear of the vast 
skeleton, inching, almost flow- 
ing along, then lay inert, cringing 
and shuddering in the hard radia- 
tion of the brilliant light of day. 

But this was something that 
happened. To the monstrosity it 
was normal. It was a creature of 
the radiation and could tolerate it. 
It did not die. 



S LOWLY a new carapace 
formed over the acres of shift- 



THE INVADERS 



45 




ing, rippling flesh, thickening and 
darkening, becoming more and 
more the color of the expanse of 
sand around it. Its appendanges 
stiffened as armor sheathed them. 
Around the great dome of its body 
they then reached outward, grop- 
ing, huge pincers clashing. 

They found what they searched 
for. The discarded skeleton, a 
great split crumpled mass, was 
seized and slowly dragged to 
where the creatures staring 
stalked eyes could study it. Mas- 
sive chelae pulled it to the mouth 
opening, wide palps savored it 
and for hours the splintering 
crunch of its mandibles sounded as 
it devoured its previous covering 
to the last morsel. 

Then it settled itself ponder- 
ously into the sand, drawing in 
the many pairs oT appendages and 
burying them deep. The carapace 
had finished its hardening. Ridges 
ran from its edge to the high peak 
of its center, like rain furrows 
from the top of a cone-shaped hill. 
Its eyestalks drew back under 
their heavy protective overhangs. 
It sat, quiescent, thirty thousand 
times the size of any canceroid 
that fed it. It could have been 
carved from the stone of the near- 
by hills. No watcher would have 
suspected it to be alive. The sponge 
clusters and crust-like life forms in- 
vaded and began to grow again, 



camouflaging the new carapace. 

The Eater lay in a deep stupor, 
maturing its tissues, consolidat- 
ing the increase in size that came 
with every shedding. When the 
outcry, which was not sound and 
which only a canceroid could de- 
tect, began again, it would be 
stronger, more insistent than ever 
before. 

The Eater has molted and now 
it does not call for food. Knobbed 
Claw exuded pleasure. This is a 
marvelous thing. Perhaps it will 
not need to eat again for many 
starshines. 

His pulse of relief was re- 
inforced from many thought cen- 
ters and Red Spine, who knew bet- 
ter, shielded what was in his mind. 
They would know soon enough. 

And all this happened only 
days before the Invader ship 
came in. 

T T CAME gently, slowly, quiet- 
* ly, an enormous glittering cyl- 
inder, featureless, having no 
openings and no appendages. 
There was nothing to show why it 
should fly through the light at- 
mosphere of Cancerol as though it 
were a flutterby. x But fly it did 
without effort, cruising low over 
the wide stretches of open country, 
swinging with silent ease over the 
piled masses of the Scaling Hills. 



46 



IF 




Red Spine watched it. Flattened 
in the sand, his appendages drawn 
under him, his eyestalks ex- 
truded, he stared with a cold intelli- 
gent wonder. For Red Spine had 
speculated on things such as this. 
But his speculations had never 
included such size, such implica- 
tions of advanced competence. 
He had no' basis for the concept of 
a ship. On Cancerol all beings 
were their own transportation. 
So he thought that the Invader 
ship was a living thing and down in 
his cold consciousness a fear be- 
gan and grew. 

If it must feed, he thought, it 
will require living things. When 
we feed ourselves and keep the 
Eater satisfied, not much re- 
mains. Therefore it will eat  us! 

Canceroids were not prone to 
panic, but Red Spine felt un- 
accustomed agitation when the 
strange object finally drifted 
down. It came to rest on the stretch 
of open sand where the members 
of Red Spines shelter cluster al- 
ways played at pebble tag. Only a 
few minutes journey away, slop- 
ing under the nearest hill, was the 
wide, low main entrance of the 
shelter. 

As it happened, not many mem- 
bers of the cluster were abroad 
when the great cylinder touched 
down. It was the time of rest. Most 
were in repose in the cool dark 



chambers of the shelter. When the 
sun Cancer was hidden, when the 
radiation dropped, this was their 
normal time of activity. They 
could tolerate the savage sunshine, 
but they did not require it. The 
day was the time of the sponge 
masses, the green and red and yel- 
low producer beings that dotted 
the sandy plains and clung even to 
the raw faces of the vertical cliffs. 
They reveled in the sun. While it 
shone they grew, sucking mois- 
ture from the dry air and from deep 
in the soil, building succulent 
masses of tissue that formed the 
food base of the planet. Not only 
the canceroids, but a wealth of 
other life preyed on and con- 
tinually pruned the ever-growing 
mounds. 

More often than most of his fel- 
lows Red Spine prowled in the 
bright radiation. He was con- 
cerned with the speed at which the 
sponge beings grew, with the 
amount of food for canceroids 
that they produced. He watched 
the other forms that fed on the 
sponges. These, too, could be eaten 
by canceroids, but only the body 
parts that could be regenerated. 
On Cancerol there was one law 
and all things respected it. Life 
must not be destroyed. 

So Red Spine watched the in- 
vader land. He was appalled by its 
bigness and deeply concerned 



THE INVADERS 



47 




that it might not respect the law. 
For how could it know? Why 
should it care? It was an unbe- 
lievable shape and greater in length 
even than the Eater, which lay like 
a cone-shaped hill a short run 
away. 

Red Spine settled deeper into 
the sand, his stalked eyes glittering 
like brilliants. And a strange thing 
happened. 

A hole opened in the side of the 
Invader. Out of the hole small be- 
ings swarmed, beings unlike any- 
thing ever seen on Cancerol. They 
were white, shiny white, bouncing 
back the sunlight. They had 
appendages, but only two pairs, 
placed at opposite ends of the long 
bodies. One pair they used for lo- 
comotion, the other they waved 
about in random patterns, or used 
to hold what seemed to be arti- 
facts. A large round head sat atop 
the body column. One glistening 
eye covered half the head, and al- 
ways faced in the direction of the 
creatures locomotion. 

Red Spine understood. It was a 
hard thing to grasp, but he dealt 
with facts, and there was no doubt- 
ing the evidence of his eyes. The 
Invader was an artifact. It was a 
made thing. Presumably the be- 
ings spewing out of it had made it, 
used it for shelter and locomo- 
tion, used it to bring them out from 
the blue mystery of space. 



Red Spine was well camou- 
flaged. The rippling colors that 
could flow along his carapace 
ridges were extinguished. His 
appendages were buried. He could 
have been simply a symmetrical 
boulder lying among the stones 
that were scattered everywhere. 
But they found him quickly and 
unerringly. 

II 

T HEY surrounded him, teeter- 
ing on their single pairs of 
walking appendages. They held 
out small objects with their hold- 
ing chelae. And they communi- 
cated continually  by sound! 
Primitive. Still, Red Spine knew 
that these beings were not primi- 
tive. They were different. And 
probably they were danger. How, 
in what fashion, he did not know. 
His thought centers grappled cold- 
ly with the problem. And prompt- 
ly he decided what he would do. 

The ring of white figures 
widened when he rose slowly and 
majestically from the sand, stand- 
ing high on his sixteen pairs of 
appendages. Every spine that 
stippled his high-crowned cara- 
pace, far greater in diameter than 
the height of the tallest alien, 
glowed with a ruby light. He ex- 
truded his eyes to the extreme 



48 



IF 




length of their stalks, folded his 
palps decorously over his mouth 
opening. Then, with dignity, he 
flashed the peace sign with his cold 
light. 

The beings teetered backward 
swiftly and a babble of sound 
came from them. They held out 
long objects in their holding 
chelae, cylinders with the ends 
pointing at him. The high sharp 
noises were not intelligible, but 
their meaning was plain, just the 
same. They were fear noises. 
Somehow, they had misunder- 
stood the signs of friendship. The 
cylinders were menace. 

Red Spine was incapable of 
sound. He could communicate 
only with the awareness waves of 
his kind and with these beings he 
felt that they would be useless. 

Still he tried. 

Do not panic, he projected. 
We are different, but that is no 
cause for fear. And because 
courtesy required it he again 
flashed the peace sign. 

The sounds how came from one 
being, while the others held out 
the cylinders. 

Easy does it, the being said. 
No radiation in that flash. Its as 
cold as firefly light. That thing is 
saying something. 

Yeah, another vocalized. 
Get off my world or Ill blast you! 
Thats what its saying. 



There was rumbling sound from 
the first being. 

Good old Pegleg! Your faith, 
as usual, is touching. Look at it! If 
it had a tail, it would be wagging it. 
Theres no menace there. 

A third being, a smaller than 
the rest, made a higher, shriller 
sound, most unpleasant to Red 
Spines receptors. Yet in spite of 
this he could sense the friendliness 
in it. 

I agree, Roscoe. It means no 
harm. It may even be frightened: It 
must have seen us land. 

Again the rumbling sound from 
the first being. 

That could have brightened up 
its day. Lets back away and see 
what itll do. If its really aware 
itll think^ef something. 

Do you mind, said the other 
maker of deep sounds, if I keep 
my laser pointed in its general 
direction? Just in case what it 
thinks of isnt what you had in 
mind? 

If there were danger Id feel it, 
the high sound said. There! And 
it placed the cylinder it had been 
holding into a slit in its carapace. 

Grandstanding, the ^ deep 
sound grumbled. Lindy, little 
friend of the galaxy. You only 
have to be wrong once, you know. 

The sounds receded as the be- 
ings teetered backward on those 
single pairs of appendanges, al- 



THE INVADERS 



49 




ways keeping the large eye toward 
him. Red Spine felt a sudden 
twinge of pity as he watched. Such 
flimsy, unstable creatures! But 
then he turned his stalked eyes 
toward the huge artifact that had 
brought them there and his pity 
died. These were advanced be- 
ings. Whence they had come, how 
they moved through, space, why 
they were here  no canceroid 
could imagine. The sounds that 
they made were varied and Red 
Spine knew that they were com- 
plex speech. He had recorded 
them all in his memory tissues, so 
that later, in a thought period, he 
could bring them back and analyse 
their components, searching for 
keys that would reveal their mean- 
ings. 

The beings continued to move 
away, so Red Spine flexed his 
many pairs of walking append- 
ages and began to rotate slowly, 
first in place, then drifting across 
the sand like a great spinning top. 
The invaders became small white 
dots in the distance. The can- 
ceroid had but one thought sudden- 
ly  to get back to the shelter 
cluster and tell this strange tale. He 
felt sure that he was being 
watched, so he took a long and de- 
vious route, zig-zagging among 
the boulders, and finally spinning 
around the mighty cone-shaped 
mass that was the Eater. With its 



bulk between him and the distant 
beings he sped for the shelter 
opening like a desert dust-devil. 

O THERS had seen the alien 
carrier come to ground. Half a 
dozen elders, the largest and at 
times the most brightly colored of 
the cluster, sat inert on 
prominences, their stalked eyes 
fixed on the long cylinder of the 
distant artifact. 

We feared you were de- 
stroyed. one projected. It was 
Right Twist. Red Spine respected 
him. Right Twist was old and 
learned. 

The creature came out of 
space, Right Twist continued. 
We saw it come. It had many 
pairs of stalked eyes and its mouth 
opening glowed red. No doubt it 
has come to feed on us. 

Your vision is better than 
mine, Red Spine thought 
courteously. I was quite closer 
and I did not see these things. But 
it settled near me and I learned. 
What did you learn? Yellow 
Stripe showed no color now. His 
carapace was sand gray, as were 
the others. 

I learned, Red Spine pro- 
jected, that it is not a creature at 
all. It requires no food. It is an 
artifact. 

He could sense the polite disbe- 
lief from half a dozen thought cen- 



50 



IF 




teFS. For a brief time span there 
was no other communication. 

Then Right Twist projected 
gravely: There are facts to sup- 
port this statement? 

There are facts, Red Spine 
acknowledged. The thing is a car- 
rier of many small beings. An 
opening formed in it and a num- 
ber of them came out and walked 
on the sand. They have white cara- 
paces and one great eye. They lo- 
comote on a single pair of append- 
ages. And, he paused, for the 
point was an impressive one, 
they communicate entirely by 
sound. 

Primitives! The pulse burst 
from Yellow Stripe. 

This is unlikely. The pro- 
jection came from Blue Dot, who 
occupied the highest prominence. 
To build and use a carrier such as 
this is not primitive. 

They all sat. An aura of puzzle- 
ment and frustration seemed to 
hang in the air, but to have no par- 
ticular origin. They all contributed 
to it. 

You accept Red Spines facts? 
Right Twist thought at Blue Dot. 

My vision is good, Blue Dot 
said, and I sit above you. There 
are small bits of white about the^ 
thing and they are moving. 

Their eye is very large, Red 
Spine said. It may be that they al- 
so see us. 



We have no ways of measuring 
what they can do, Right Twist de- 
cided. They are alien. Whence 
they came we cannot imagine. 
Why they are here we cannot even 
speculate. Our rules will not apply 
to them. We can only watch. 

And be watched, Blue Dot 
thought drily. 

And hope. Yellow Stripes 
fear throbbed in his projection. 
From the very egg he had been 
timid. 

When the sun is gone, Red 
Spine thought, when the radia- 
tion drops and the only light is 
starshine, we can look closely at 
the artifact. The aliens will be in- 
side. It is likely that they come out 
only in the day. 

But not certain, Right Twist 
cautioned. We must use cau- 
tion. 

They were very near me and 
examined me carefully and I 
came to no harm. And when I rose 
and flashed the peace sign, they 
showed fear. They pointed cylin- 
ders at me and walked away back- 
ward, the large eyes always on me. 
And the sounds seemed dis- 
turbed.  

Nevertheless, we will wait, 
Right Twist decreed. I agree that 
the time of starshine is best. We 
will go then. 

While he had no power to make 
decisions, because of his age he 



THE INVADERS 



51 




was respected. They waited. The 
intelligence of the landing of the 
strange carrier was projected in- 
to the shelter opening, where it 
was passed from thought center to 
thought center by hundreds of 
canceroids in dozens of chambers 
and corridors and repose 
cubicles. Each being sat quietly 
wherever it received the news. 
There was no rush to the shelter 
opening or to emergency exits to 
see for themselves. There was 
nothing more to^ be done or 
learned until starshine. So they 
waited. 

A ND as they waited it began 
again. Whether the unusual 
mental activity of the canceroids 
disturbed it or whether simply the 
renewed peristalsis of its vast 
gut  empty after the rigors of 
molt and new skeleton forma- 
tion  roused The Eater mattered 
not. What did matter was that 
when he sulky, petulant rumble 
began, it must be fed. 

Food! Food! Food! 

Each canceroid understood, 
with an almost inherited wis- 
dom, that the Eater should not 
move. Red Spine had wondered in 
moments of meditation if it 
could move for any great distance, 
after all the eons of remaining in 
that one location among the 
boulders on the hot sandy plain. 



Even its wastes were removed 
from behind it. Canceroids car- 
ried them far and wide, burying 
them under the sand. And at these 
spots the sponge clusters grew with 
unusual vigor and provided more 
and better cuttings of food pieces. 

Still, the Eater did move  if on- 
ly a little way  as it flowed out of 
its armor at each molt. These hap- 
pened rarely. Red Spine could re- 
call but two in his life span. They 
occured just after the creature 
had had great masses of food. On- 
ly some great destruction of life, 
such as the fall of rock just past, 
could provide enough . 

Food! Food! Food! 

The mindless pulses became 
stronger, clearer. The Eaters pa- 
tience was not great. 

Right Twist flashed a call into 
the shelter cluster. When the first 
canceroid emerged, he himself led 
the way out to where the sponge 
clusters were best developed. Oth- 
er shelter clusters, each in its tradi- 
tional turn, would be sending out 
food gatherers to placate the 
Eaters endless hunger. There was 
no resentment. It had always 
been thus. Only Red Spine won- 
dered, deep in his contemplation 
centers, if this should be. 

-The Eater will require more 
food than ever before, Blue Dot 
projected. Some of it must come 
from very far away. 



52 



IF 




I wonder, Red Spine thought, 
if all the canceroids from all the 
shelter clusters can provide 
enough. The sponge bodies are 
pruned as closely as we dare. We 
bring to it all dead bodies of all be- 
ings, however small. And still it 
cries. 

We must give it more, Blue 
Dot said. 

There isnt more. Our own food 
needs must be remembered. The 
symbionts of the shelter clusters 
must eat. The little beings that 
live under rocks, the flutterbys of 
the air, all must feed. Life cannot 
be destroyed even for the Eater. 

Then, Blue Dot said, perhaps 
the Eater will go searching for its 
own nourishment. It does not 
know that life must not be de- 
stroyed. If we do not feed it, it will 
devour anything in its path. It will 
leave nothing of the sponge be- 
ings to r^enerate. It will tear apart 
the shelter clusters. It will feed 
on  us. 

And then, having destroyed 
all the food, it will die, Red Spine 
said. There is no benefit here for 
anything. All life will be de- 
stroyed to no purpose. Cancerol, 
the home world, will have no in- 
habitants. 

Blue Dot swiveled his stalked 
eyes toward the long cylinder of 
the alien carrier, far across the 
desert. 



Others will come; he pro- 
phesied. There is proof, that car- 
rier out there. Beings from space 
will take the world that has been 
ours since the beginning. 



"O ED SPINE shifted his many 
appendages restlessly. This 
talk disturbed him. Something 
was wrong here. His sense of jus- 
tice was offended. It was legend 
that the Eater had always been 
there, slowly growing bigger, 
and that canceroids had always 
fed it. But why? What did it contri- 
bute? Its wastes were not enough. 
Without it there would be food in 
plenty. There would be time for 
thought, for contemplation. With 
it, extinction threatened. 

I sense your thoughts, Blue 
Dot projected. You should shield 
them. They are not worthy of you. 

Red Spine said, All sides of a 
problem should be considered. 
Even this one. Why should we feed 
the Eater? 

It has always been done. 

That is not enough. For every- 
thing else there must be a reason. 
Why must I not challenge this? 

No one ever has, said Blue 
Dot. 

And so we must die. Is this 
reasonable? Do you deny my right 
to question? 

The bright blue spots of Blue 



THE INVADERS 



53 




Dots carapace slowly faded un- 
til he was again the color of the 
rocks around. He withdrew his 
eyestalks into their sockets. Ner- 
vously his appendages tossed a 
pebble back and forth. 

You disturb me. Such 
thoughts have always been buried 
deep and have never been un- 
shielded. But you have the right to 
question. 

Red Spine felt satisfaction. 
Do we know that the Eater can 
move and destroy all life? It never 
has. Why may it not use more 
energy in moving than it gets from 
the food it finds? Then it will grow 
weaker, find less food. 

And finally die, Blue Dot 
finished. That is not defensible. 
Life cannot be destroyed. 

It is defensible. All living be- 
ings must feed themselves. If they 
do not they die. 

The Eater is different. It has 
never fed itself. 

And now, Red Spine pro- 
jected boldly, I wonder why. 
You have admitted my right to 
question and you cannot tell me 
why. 

Doubt and dismay swirled 
around the big canceroids as they 
sat unmoving on the prominences. 
Yellow Stripe and Purple Fringe 
and Plain Shell and Knobbed Claw 
and Blue Dot were completely 
without their distinguishing color 



patterns. Even a good eye could 
scarcely have told one from an- 
other. 

But Red Spine had never been 
brighter. The tip of every spine 
sparkled crimson. The six eyes at 
the ends of their extended stalks 
glinted pale crystalline blue. He 
raised and lowered his glowing 
body disk, half spinning as the 
appendages shifted. An idea that 
had been buried deep in his con- 
sciousness since his growing 
molts had finally emerged. It was 
heresy, but it was reasonable. 
That the Eater was given the food 
that should have been the right of 
all living things everyone knew. 
But the thought had never been 
allowed to surface. It had never 
been expressed before. 

Red Spine was stimulated, 
elated. 

I may die, he projected, but 
I will not be the cause. I will no 
longer take food to the Eater. 

But   the soundless pulse 
burst from five thought cen- 
ters  it must be fed! 

Why? 

We are repeating, Blue Dot 
said. We cannot insure that you 
will feed the Eater. But we can re- 
move your appendages, to give 
you time to reflect while they re- 
generate: This has been done. 

True, Red Spine mused, but 
I do not agree that this is required. 



54 



IF 




Therefore, I will resist. And if I 
do, you will lose appendages as 
well. 

But no one has ever resisted! 
Yellow Stripes thought pulse 
quavered. 

True. And no one ever before 
decided not to feed the Eater. I 
have long felt that this is just. I al- 
so feel that it would be reasonable 
to protect my appendages. 

You have the right to believe 
this, Blue Dot said reluctantly. 
We will wait for the wisdom of 
Right Twist. 

Red Spine rocked on his append- 
ages. 

He also is fallible, he stated. 
When the alien carrier came 
down he saw on it appendages and 
many stalked eyes. Now I was near 
it, on the sand, and it had none of 
those things. It was his fear that 
saw. 

Stalk'ed eyes emerged again 
from carapace sheaths. For a brief 
while they had forgotten the 
aliens. The insistent food call' of 
the Eater had subsided into a 
sulky murmur, so they knew that 
food was being piled before it. 
While it ate the hunger pulses grew 
less. 

Ill 

T HE sun had set. Overhead the 
stars grew steadily brighter, a 



black canopy stippled with sweeps 
and swirls of yellow points. The 
time of starshine was beginning. 
The radiation had receded. It was 
the pleasant time. 

The small white beings will go 
back into the carrier, Red Spine 
said quietly. This will be the time 
to look closely at the artifact. 

I must feed the Eater, Blue 
Dot said hastily. It is my turn. 
And mine! And mine! And 
mine! 

I am free, Yellow Stripe ad- 
mitted. I will go, but not too near. 
We should not frighten them  if 
they are small, as you say. 

I will go also, a thought 
pulsed ffom distance. It may be 
that I did not see eyes and append- 
ages. If there are none, I will cor- 
rect my statement. 

We will meet you, Red Spine 
projected. Then we can agree on 
what is there. 

It was the first of many visits. 
The canceroids approached the 
great ship carefully at first, but on 
succeeding nights  in succeed- 
ing times of starshine  they 
gradually grew bolder. They paced 
the distance from end to end of the 
ship, a distance greater than the 
longest corridor in the largest 
shelter cluster. They marveled at 
the smooth curving sides of the 
huge cylinder. In those glistening 
walls, openings could appear, 



THE INVADERS 



55 




sometimes small, to allow the be- 
ings to come through, sometimes 
so large that gleaming, pointed 
artifacts were spat from them, to 
cruise far and wide in the air over 
the deserts and mountains and 
finally return and be received in- 
to the openings again. 

One thing was discovered 
early. The beings were not con- 
fined to the sunshine. Like the 
canceroids, they soon realized 
that the night was the better time. 
And, added marvel, when they 
came out into the starshine they 
were different. What appeared to 
be a carapace was not a part of the 
beings at all. When the sun was 
gone they emerged pliant and 
slender, the great eye replaced by 
two tiny ones and a mouth orifice 
studded with small white stones in 
rows. The false carapace was 
simply a shielding structure 
against the radiation and was 
readily removed. 

By sunlight and by starshine, 
Red Spine watched. Almost al- 
ways he was near the carrier, im- 
pressing every wonder onto his 
memory tissues. Since he no longer 
fed the Eater, he had time. And 
soon he was deeply disturbed at 
what the aliens did. 

They looked closely at all life. 
Nothing escaped their attention. 
They had strange means of loco- 
motion, leaping far across the 



desert at a single bound, or rolling 
along in a device into which sev- 
eral of the beings fitted. To Red 
Spine these things were merely 
curios. But the beings lack of re- 
gard for the right of all beings to 
live was quite another thing. 

To take a portion of an 
organism for food was proper and 
necessary. But even in direst situa- 
tion enough of the being must be 
left to regenerate. Otherwise life 
would not continue. 

This basic understanding was 
completely ignored by the aliens. 
They took entire individuals and 
placed them in confinement- and 
would not allow them the freedom 
of movement that had always 
been the right of all things. In rows 
and rows of enclosures they im- 
prisoned beings both large and 
small. They climbed the hills, lifted 
the rocks, dug under the sand. 
Even flutterbys beat their flying 
appendages helplessly against 
cleverly woven wall meshes of 
bright metal. 

R ED SPINE communicated 
what he saw. The ehders of the 
shelter cluster sat* long in rapport, 
discussing what was known. As 
always they listened to Right 
Twist, because greater age gave 
greater wisdom. 

And Right Twist, after much 
meditation, finally offered his 



56 



IF 




conclusion. He spoke first to Red 
Spine, as they lingered near the 
carrier in bright starshine. 

These creatures, no matter 
how advanced, have brought to 
the homeworld an ancient bar- 
barism. They destroy. Therefore 
they must themselves be de- 
stroyed. 

A life for a life solves noth- 
ing. Red Spine took philosophi- 
cal opposition. First it must be 
understood why they do these 
things. They must be prevailed on 
to desist. 

Why? Right Twist ques- 
tioned. Will this release the 
forms they have imprisoned? Will 
it bring back those they have de- 
stroyed? Will it prevent them from 
destroying more? We have specu- 
lated on life from the stars, but who 
could have imagined that it would 
have primitive, exterminative 
ethics? 

Perhaps they are not really 
alive, Red Spine speculated. In 
many ways they seem artificial. 
They could be merely devices, 
controlled by the Ultimate Wis- 
dom from unimaginable space. 
They could have been sent to test 
the strength of our convictions, 
the consistency of our beliefs in 
the sacredness of life. 

Right Twist picked up a pebble, 
passed it from appendage to 
appendage around the entire 



circle of his carapace, a swift, facile 
gesture of irritation. 

They are alive, he projected. 
Their metabolism involves food 
and energy release and excre- 
tion. They are affected by the 
radiation. Note how quickly they 
have adjusted to the starshine 
cycle. Their carapaces are arti- 
ficial. But they are alive. 

Red Spine knew this. He simply 
made use of the practices of de- 
bate while he thought. It was 
ethically necessary to refute an 
idea before a discussion could 
progress. Red Spine was a 
true fundamentalist in his think- 
ing and to destroy an organism 
totally was, admittedly, not de- 
fensible. But Right Twist, from an- 
other view, was showing alarm- 
ing signs of instability. Perhaps 
he should be deprived of all his 
appendages, to give him time to 
reflect and to become more ra- 
tional while they regenerated. This 
was a mere passing thought pulse, 
shielded deep in his contempla- 
tive centers, and while Right Twist 
could not detect it, he probably 
shrewdly speculated that it was 
there. 

I propose that we approach 
them directly, Red Spine 
thought, in his dulcet frequencies. 
We cannot judge them by their 
actions. We must know their mo- 
tivation.' 



THE INVADERS 



57 




I do not care to be collected, 
Right Twist thought drily. I have 
no intention of having my move- 
ments restricted by an enclosure. 
These are alien, savage life forms. 
Undoubtedly they are searching 
for a life space. Ours is the ideal 
planet. They will take it unless we 
prevent them  and in the taking 
destroy us all. 

Red Spine was becoming more 
than disturbed. He was appalled. 
He had not realized the extent of 
Right Twistss thought deviation. 
It was he who was the primitive, 
savage form. To suspect the aliens 
of needing a life space was a 
proposition not worthy of a larva. 
Obviously their technology was 
almost unbelievably advanced. 
It would be far more reasonable to 
meet them as equals, welcome 
them as guests, touch their strange 
centers in friendship. 

Compared to them, Red 
Spine offered, we are large. They 
would not try to dismember or 
imprison us. They will treat us 
with respect. 

They control enormous 
energies, retorted Right Twist. 
Size is meaningless. I propose 
that we take one when it strays 
from its group, remove its append- 
ages and observe how it re- 
generates. This should provide 
some clue as to their possible po- 
tential to harm us. 



T HE sharp projections along 
the radiating lines of Red 
Spines carapace glowed a 
brighter, a faintly pulsating scar- 
let. His six stalked eyes glistened 
like blue jade. 

Unwise, he projected. 
These beings are connected by a 
communications net. Injure one 
and the others will know. Furth- 
er, I feel sure that they do not re- 
generate. Of the many from the 
carrier, not one lacks an append- 
age from the two pairs that are all 
they seem to have. 

Then how do they feed? Can it 
be that they consume entire 
bodies and use their gonads alone 
to produce more? Disgusting! 
They are merely different, 
Red Spine thought soothingly. 
Consider that they came from 
the depths of space. They are both 
a challenge and an opportunity. 
Not, I think, a menace. 

Red Spine himself was actually 
more disturbed by the invaders 
than he., wished Right Twist to 
know. They exhibited, indeed, a 
frightenjng adaptability. In a 
space of ten rotations of the 
planet, of the glorious homeworld 
Cancerol, the Center of the Uni- 
verse, they had shown quick un- 
derstanding of how living things 
were fitted to conditions and dis- 
tributed as to space. These beings 
also, knew untold things that a 



58 



IF 




canceroid could only suspect. 
They had come from space. They 
knew what was out there. 

Suddenly Red Spine felt the 
need for meditation, for solitude. 
He turned his disk slowly, flashed 
the peace sign with his cold light 
and went spinning away across the 
sand toward the shelter cluster. He 
enjoyed the exercise, enjoyed the 
exhilaration of the flexing 
muscles in his sixteen sets of 
appendages. Out of sheer well-be- 
ing he spun faster and faster, leav-^ 
ing a blurred, looping trail across 
the sand. 

Right Twist followed him, but 
more slowly, scuttling along in a 
straight line, his stalked eyes 
directed back at the great space 
vessel of the aliens. 

Red Spine felt amusement. 
Right Twist now had no friendship 
for the creatures, but there was in 
him a healthy respect for what they 
might do. He was not disposed to 
remain near their ship alone. 

D AY followed day. The elders 
of the shelter cluster stabilized 
their attitudes toward the aliens, 
but they kept their thoughts 
shielded. There was not the rap- 
port that had always existed be- 
fore, for the points of view were too 
far apart. Red Spine communi- 
cated and soothed and counseled 
friendship whenever he felt a 



* 

mind open to him. This was not of- 
ten. But he was aware of the feel- 
ings of most and worked quietly to 
modify them. 

Yellow Stripe, he knew, feared 
the invaders, as he always feared 
any unknown thing. He felt sure 
that Right Twist was plotting, 
deep in his own consciousness, to 
conduct his regeneration ex- 
periment if ever he could lay 
holding appendages on a speci- 
men. Blue Dot remained aloof, 
coldly watching while the aliens 
went about their taboo-breaking, 
blasphemous activities. And 
Red Spine himself kept his stalked 
eyes on them all. 

He felt satisfaction that the 
aliens had made no attempt to im- 
prison a canceroid. Instead, 
they also seemed to be watching, 
using recording artifacts. They 
made many sounds, waved their 
appendages in strange ways, 
emitted energies in wave-lengths 
most distressing to the cancer- 
oid nervous system. Red Spine in- 
terpreted this behavior, he felt, 
correctly. 

It is justice, he projected. 
While we are studying them, they 
are beyond doubt studying us. 
They recognize the nonthinking 
forms for what they are. Us they 
treat differently. 

We are large, Yellow Stripe 
said fearfuly. He kept his ener- 



THE INVADERS 



59 




gy pulses to lowest intensity, so 
that his thoughts were hard to de- 
tect. Only our size prevents 
them from destroying us. 

I feel that this has little ef- 
fect, Red Spine thought. They 
have energies we could never 
counter. Instead, it seems likely 
that they are trying to communi- 
cate. The sounds, the waving ap- 
pendages, all indicate this. It is 
in this fashion that they commu- 
nicate with each other. 

This is evidence of low intel- 
ligence level, came from Right 
Twist. Only primitive forms use 
sound. 

You are thinking with our 
measuring devices. They came 
from space, in a vessel wider and 
longer than any burrow in any 
cluster on the homeworld. This is 
not primitive. "It is very ad- 
vanced. We could not do it. 

We would not wish to, Right 
Twist said stubbornly. We have 
here the best of all possible 
worlds. Why should we leave? 
While they, having nothing to 
compare with CanceroL have 
come to wrest it from us and live 
here always. 

It was then that Red Spine be- 
gan to realize that he had a re- 
sponsibility to sustain some- 
thing far more basic than a differ- 
ence of opinion or philosophy. 
Deep in the cold recesses of his 



thinking structures the convic- 
tion grew that these creatures, 
these invaders, with their mighty 
space vessel and unbelievable 
artifacts, mut not be given cause 
to become antagonistic. What 
Right Twist plotted was danger- 
ous. The senseless fears of Yellow 
Stripe might result in senseless 
behavior, actions the aliens 
would not understand. That was 
the real hazard. Lack of under- 
standing. 

For these beings did not covet 
the homeworld. They were too dif- 
ferent. The conditions that ex- 
isted on Cancerol, so satisfying 
to the radiation-resistant na- 
tive life, actually caused them 
grief. So it followed that they 
would not stay. As they came, so 
they would go. But they must not 
be challenged as long as they 
caused no deliberate harm, no 
widespread destruction. 

IV 

R ED SPINE himself had 
caused another problem, an- 
other stress in the age-old pattern 
of canceroid life: His refusal to 
feed the Eater was communi- 
cated from cluster to cluster. 
Rapport groups throughout the 
range of his kind gave it deep con- 
sideration. His own cluster de- 
bated it again and again. 



60 



IF 




The Eater cannot move, Blue 
Dot finally decided. Why 
should it then eat my food? I think 
Red Spine has wisdom. 

Would you suggest that we, 
too, cease to feed it? Knobbed 
Claw asked. 

I will go further, projected 
Blue Dot. Henceforth I will gath- 
er only for the shelter cluster. 
Let the Eater provide for itself. 
Madness, Yellow Stripe pro- 
tested. He twiddled his palps ner- 
vously. We live the best of all 
possible lives because we have al- 
ways fed the Eater. It is the price 
we pay for our existence. If we 
stop we will certainly die. 

And we die if we continue. 
Food can no longer be brought fast 
enough. No  if I must die, let it 
be a new way. I bring no more 
food. 

This is a reasonable posi- 
tion, Knobbed Claw said. I will 
reflect on it. 

It was a point of view that sud- 
denly became contagious. From 
other shelter clusters fewer and 
fewer workers streamed in with 
biomass for the endlessly hun- 
gry mountain-thing. Higher and 
ever more frantic grew its tele-/ 
pathic screams. 

Food! Food! Food! 

After eons of unconfused, 
peaceful living  wherein all 

things were known and predic- 



table  the homeworld was in 
turmoil. Out in the desert the in- 
vader ship lay unmoving, inert, 
but the beings that inhabited it 
scurried and hopped and walked 
and flew like an all-pervading 
plague. They were everywhere. 
And ^always the Eaters raven- 
ous projections frazzled nerve- 
ends. 

The aliens had early discov- 
ered that the Eater was a being- 
 that it was alive. They gave it 
much attention. Red Spine could 
always find some of them near it, 
watching, making their varied 
sounds. And he was there when 
three of them climbed to the peak 
of the great carapace, drawing 
themselves up the steep slope by 
clinging to its gnarled spines and 
by bracing their appendages in 
the cracks and striations that 
seamed it. They paused to study 
the sponge clusters and the lichen 
forms which so encrusted it that it 
appeared little different from 
the distant hills. 

These three were known to Red 
Spine. He passed them often and 
when he flashed the peace sign they 
always waved their appendages 
in answer. He had seen them 
watching, probably with wonder 
and astonishment, the continu- 
al carrying of food and the re- 
moval of wastes. Now as they 
climbed, he studied them in turn. 



THE INVADERS 



61 




T HEY made the sounds of 
communication often. Red 
Spine recorded these in his mem- 
ory tissues as usual, though Jje 
wondered now if he would ever 
have the leisure and the peace to 
try to decipher them. 

One of the beings spoke deeply. 
Ive ridden whales on Cetus I and 
dinosaurs on Aldebaran II, but 
I do believe this is the first time 
Ive climbed a living hill   

Its smaller companion made the 
high trilling sound so irritating 
to Red Spines detectors. 

Anyhow, Roscoe, this one 
wont throw you. It must not have 
moved for ages. It probably 
cant. 

It has appendages, the third 
being vocalized. They look like 
buried redwood trunks. It 4 s 
adapted to move. And, it added 
maliciously, if it moves, Ros- 
coe falls. He has ridden things 
but he hasnt ridden em far! 

It was starshine, and the aliens 
were without their clumsy cover- 
ings. They- swung nimbly from 
spine to spine, chattering as they 
climbed. Finally they stood on 
the very peak of the giant cara- 
pace. They appeared small against 
the star canopy, but their sounds 
came clearly to Red Spine on the 
plain below. 

All that food! Roscoe, give us 
the ecological justification 



for that. It looks like these crea- 
tures are starving themselves, 
using up their own feeding time 
and substance, just endlessly 
stuffing this thing. How do they 
profit? 

I think they dont, Pegleg. 
Theyre losing ground. They must 
have been doing it for many years, 
for certainly the creature grows. 
Notice how rushed they seem. 

Red Spine got no meaning from 
the sounds. Still, he was watching 
the hurrying canceroids with 
their loads of food, and a cold con- 
cern was building in his thought 
centers. For he could detect, as 
the aliens could not, the mindless 
outrage of the Eater that its 
hunger was not being satisfied. 
Red Spine knew he was right. The 
Eater should not be fed at all. Per- 
haps it never should have been  
but now it was no longer possible. 
They could not bring enough. 

Im going down to the intake 
end, the larger of the deep-voiced 
aliens sounded. There are proba- 
bly eyestalks under those crags 
down there. All of a sudden I 
think I know what this thing is! 

Its steep, the high sound said. 
Ill go back the way we came. 
Meet you at the bottom, Roscoe. 
Come on, Pegleg. 

I think Ill just sit a spell and 
watch you both, the other deep 
sound said. First hill I ever 



62 



IF 




climbed where I couldnt chip the 
rocks. A chiton-covered moun- 
tain! Wild! 

Red Spines eyestalks were ful- 
ly extended. Puzzlement grew in 
him as the alien climbed down the 
Eater's carapace, paused at the 
giant eyestalk sheaths, then swung 
from spines above the almost ver- 
tical drop to the cavernous 
mouth opening below. 

Canceroids brought food. It was 
sponge tissue, the basic food, and 
the Eater swept it in with one great 
pedipalp. But it did not satisfy. 
What the Eater wanted, though 
probably it did not know it, was 
flesh. Meat. And its next move 
filled the watching Red Spine with 
cold horror. Yellow Stripe moved 
up in front of the great gaping 
maw, staggering under a food 
load. As canceroids had done for 
untold years, he deposited it the 
conventional distance from the 
mouth, turned to spin away. But 
the Eater could not wait. The huge 
pedipalp darted out, the long 
curved hooks gripped and both 
Yellow Stripe and his load were 
dragged against the enormous 
mandibles that ground like giant 
millstones. 

The canceroid gave a single 
despairing telepathic pulse, 
then the clashing gastric mill re- 
duced him to crushed biomass. 

Red Spine flashed a warning to 



other food bearers coming in 
across the desert. 

Go back! he projected. The 
Eater destroys life! The Eater 
kills! 

And as the living juices flowed 
into its gullet, the Eater, too, re- 
sponded. Its telepathic food cry 
changed, became savage. 

Food! Food! Food! 

H IGH on the top of the cara- 
pace the single alien grasped 
a spine and held on as the hill be- 
gan to rock. The mighty, buried 
appendages lashed free of the 
sand. The Eater lunged upward. 
It was only one movement of the 
locomotor limbs, but it threw the 
hill forward many diameters of 
a canceroid. Two food bearers 
understood too late. The pedi- 
palps darted, the mandibles 
clashed. The carriers and their 
loads followed Yellow Stripe. 

The small alien had completed 
its descent. In spite of its single 
pair of appendages it ran swiftly. 
But it did not run away. It circled 
the Eater, looking up to where the 
third alien clung to spines above 
the Eaters mouth opening. 

Climb back, Roscoe, it 
shrilled and for once Red Spine did 
not mind the sound. He under- 
stood that it was doing what he 
had done. It was warning its own 
kind. 



THE INVADERS 



63 




The being above was struggling 
strongly. It pulled itself up spine 
by spine while the Eater ingested 
the food bearers. It was safe. Then 
the huge stalked eyes emerged 
from their sheaths, each far larger 
than the alien, and swung back and 
forth as the Eater sought further 
prey. The alien was swept from its 
hold and went plunging down to 
land heavily on the sand. 

The Eater reacted slowly. The 
being lay a short distance from its 
mouth opening, but it had come 
from above and the mindless mon- 
ster was confused. But only for a 
moment. The pedipalp darted, 
but it swept over the being lying 
prone, flattened against the sand. 
It had no second chance. 

The small alien leaned against a 
boulder. Its slender body seemed 
to be shudderifig. But in one hold- 
ing appendage it grasped a ta- 
pered cylinder, the artifact that 
none of them was ever without. 
The pedipalp moved again and a 
pale thin beam lanced from the cyl- 
inder. The base of the pedipalp 
glowed red. Smoke rose from it. 
Then with a violent, involun- 
tary spasm the Eater cast off the 
appendage. It lay twitching on 
the sand and where it had been at- 
tached a raw, seared stump dripped 
a dark viscous blood. 

Red Spine poised on his running 
appendages. His eyestalks pro- 



truded with wonder. The pale 
beam switched to the other pedi- 
palp  and again the violent au- 
totomy resulted. The Eater cast 
the appendage. Its telepathic 
projection was no longer a food 
call. It screamed with rage and 
pain. 

Hurt! Hurt! Hurt! 

It reared high and flung itself 
backward. It was as if a mountain 
moved on the landscape. 

The alien that had fallen rolled 
over and rested on its bent walking 
appendages. It held out its own 
, cylinder. The thin beam from it 
flashed directly into the wide and 
working mouth of the vast mon- 
strosity, the mouth through which 
so much food had passed for so 
many ages. This, its last meal, was 
a knifing ray of pure, ripping en- 
ergy. 

Red Spines receptors vibrated 
with a great pulse of agony. For a 
moment it came with terrifying 
volume  then it began to fade, 
to grow gentle. It ended almost as 
a sigh. And the canceroid knew, 
without knowing how he knew, 
that a whole era had ended on the 
homeworld. He'knew that the Eat- 
er was dead. 

The two aliens clung closely, 
their holding appendages 
wrapped around each other, their 
mouth orifices pressed together, 
and from the smaller one came 



64 



IF 





Start your introductory subscription with 
the gala September issue . featuring the 
world premiere of Rendezvous with Rama, 
Arthur C. Clarkes newest novel! 



GALAXY, 
science fictions 
premiere 
magazine, goes 
monthly. 
to double your 
reading pleasure ! 



 YES, please enter my subscription for 8 issues 
of the new, monthly GALAXY . starting with 
the gala September issue ... at only $4.50. 
Thats a $1 .05 saving off the newsstand price. 

 Please renew or extend my subscription at 
these savings. 

 I prefer to DOUBLE MY SAVINGS: 

16 issues only $9.00. 

 Payment enclosed 

Brings an extra issue FREE! 




FIRST CLASS 
PERMIT NO. 705 
BOULDER, COLO. 

Business Reply Mail 

NO POSTAGE STAMP NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES    



Postage will be paid by 



galaxy 

BOX 2895 

BOULDER, COLORADO 80303 



broken, sobbing sounds. Red 
Spine dutifully recorded every- 
thing on his memory tissues. Lat- 
er, he promised himself, he would 
decide what it all meant. 

Many pairs of stalked eyes fol- 
lowed steadily as the three aliens 
walked slowly away from the 
mountain of carrion that had 
been the Eater, walked toward the 
ship that loomed across the plain 
under the stars. As the sounds of 
their vocalizing grew faint with 
distance Red Spine shook the sand 
from his appendages and scut- 
tled furtively after them. He in- 
tended that his record of sounds 
should be complete, though the 
thought of the energy of the cyl- 
inders rested cold in his memory. 
He followed until an opening in 
the ship closed behind them. Then 
he settled himself in the sand, 
studying patiently. 

V 

liUT he did not know when, lat- 
*^er, one of the beings settled it- 
self into a small square space, like 
a repose cubicle, inside the great 
carrier. It rested on an artifact 
constructed to fit its bent walking 
appendages and curved body. In a 
holding chela it grasped a small 
stylus, with which it rapidly drew 
symbols on a thin layer of white 
material resting on another ar- 



tifact before it. Had he had op- 
portunity to see, it would have 
been one more wonder to Red 
Spine, for he would have recog- 
nized it as a record, an artificial 
device for remembering. 

And had it been possible to im- 
print what he saw onto his mem- 
ory tissues, symbol by symbol, 
his recall would have been thus: 

THE LOG OF THE 
STARDUST 
Earth Calendar A. D. 2125 . 

Log entry 41. Roscoe Kis- 
singer , Ecologist. Also Dr. 
Linda Kissinger , Micro- 
biologist and Dr. Pegleg 
Williams , Geologist. 

Twenty-sixth day , post 
landing. 

Well, we did it. 

It was a judgment thing 
and maybe we bent the let- 
ter of the ISC ruling that 
says: No interference with 
the lives or the activities of 
an aware species. For they 
are aware. No doubt about 
that. More than aware. High- 
ly intelligent, with a social 
structure undoubtedly satis- 
fying and effective. 

They have an ecological- 
ly balanced economy that 
Earth might take note of. 
And they had  note had 
 an economic problem. 



THE INVADERS 



65 




And thats where we bent the 
letter. We solved it for them. 

Technically we have an 
out, I suppose. Without any 
interference three crew 
members would have had to 
move lively to save the skin 
of at least one of them. Be- 
ing that one, Id have to say 
that it would have been 
tricky. But Lindy is good 
with that laser. 

We didnt have to kill the 
thing. Our hand lasers could 
have  and did  cause it 
to cast off appendages. Like 
its normal species-mates, it 
probably would have re- 
generated them in time. But 
that would have called for 
more food. And that, I think, 
was the problem. 

The thing was a mutant, a 
mutant crab-being. How 
old it was is an interesting 
speculation, but we have 
no data at all. Undoubted- 
ly it grew in proportion to 
the amount of food they 
brought it and every molt 
upped its requirements for 
nourishment. And finally 
its need was greater than the 
environment could pro- 
duce. That was why it ran 
amok. 

I think we saved a race 
from serious damage or de- 



struction  a civilization 
of sorts. I agree that thats no 
part of our function. The 
galaxy must be full of disin- 
tegrating ecosystems. And it 
could be that maybe we just 
postponed destruction, be- 
cause the intense hard radi- 
ation in the suns rays must 
cause many a mutation. 
They may recognize these 
and do something about 
them. If so, the giant got 
away from them. 

Maybe he developed un- 
usual size before they un- 
derstood. Maybe they fed 
him first from admiration 
 or to prevent him from 
bullying them and taking 
what they had collected. 
Maybe they worshiped him, 
thought he was a god. Im 
speculating, Dr. Rasmus- 
sen, brainstorming, but it 
seems reasonable to record 
everything. You like a full 
log. So do I. So youre get- 
ting it. 

I believe that the crab peo- 
ple, the -sand-dollar people, 
as Lindy has called them, 
understand about us. I 
think they know that we are 
not of this planet, that we 
constructed the Stardust , 
that we came out of space. I 
know they try to communi- 


66 



IF 




cate. Those blasted firefly 
lights! They symbolize 
something and Im not sure 
what. Whatever it is, its 
friendly. 

Theres one, the big fellow 
with the long-spined cara- 
pace who can show red on ev- 
ery spine, that has haunted 
us, followed us around, 
watched us as carefully as 
we have watched them. He 
knows me. Whenever Im 
close to him I give him a spe- 
cial arm-wave. He flashes his 
light. And he talks to me. Oh 
yes, he does! I cant under- 
stand it  I cant even hear 
it, but its there. Ill prove it- 
 I think. 

When old Red Spine sits in 
front of me his eyestalks out 
as far as he can push them, 
those thirty-two append- 
ages rimming his carapace 
like an ornate fringe on a 
sombrero, he seems almost 
to be demanding that I lis- 
ten to him. But I cant, of 
course. There isnt any 
sound. Theres just one clue. 
My energy detector is sen- 
sitive to a faint stimulus 
when he comes near and es- 
pecially when he insists on 
communicating with me. Its 
strongest then. 

So heres more specula- 



tion. Theyre telepaths. Im 
picking up the energy of a 
mental projection. And I 
know they listen when we 
speak. Theyre probably 
just as frustrated as we are. 

It may be judged interfer- 
ence, but Ill never regret 
the demise of the mutant. If 
the International Space 
Council rules that weve ex- 
ceeded our mandate well 
just have to take our lumps. 
What do they know? A var- 
mint as tall as a hill, with a 
diameter as great ks the 
length of a football field, 
sopping up the biomass of 
a whole ecosystem and giv- 
ing nothing but its wastes in 
return  uh-uh! If the 
aware life of this part of the 
planet were to survive he 
had to go. He couldnt have 
persisted much longer any- 
how. His need for food was 
greater than his ability to 
gather it for himself. But he 
would have caused fearful 
havoc before he died. I think 
we arrived here at the criti- 
cal molt, the molt that broke 
the balance. Up to now the 
crab people could feed him. 
After that molt they 
couldnt. He was too big. 

I had thought that they 
might eat the body, but youll 



THE INVADERS 



67 




note in the tapes that theyre 
not doing so. Today we 
counted more than five thou- 
sand of them, streaming in 
from all directions, some 
from colonies hundreds of 
miles away. Theyre taking 
apart that incredible ca- 
daver, dissecting it into 
transportable parcels, car- 
rying them away and bury- 
ing them. But theyre not do- 
ing it the easy way. Theyre 
not using a limited area for 
a cemetery. Theyre spread- 
ing him out over many square 
miles of sand and desert. In 
effect, theyre putting him 
back where he came from. 

Where those chunks are 
buried, the sponge clumps 
will grow faster and bigger. 
When they are pruned and 
harvested, theyll regener- 
ate more swiftly. Therell be 
enough food for everybody. 
Sure, Im interpreting. 
Does anyone want to debate 
it? Look at your film, your 
charts, your records. Look 
at Ursulas paintings. 

I think Ill go out and say 
good-bye to : Red Spine, if I 
can find him. 

T HE days and nights of labor 
were ended. Where the enor- 
mous bulk of the Eater had al- 



ways been now there was nothing. 
For the first time in the memory 
of the oldest canceroid the sen- 
sors could not feel the sulky pres- 
sure of the creatures insatiable 
hunger. Their nerve ends had quiv- 
ered for the last time to the mind- 
less, endless cry of Food! Food! 
Food!. 

They are going, Red Spine 
projected. They have watched us 
dispose of the Eater. They know 
how we live, what we eat, how we 
die. It is, I think, their function to 
learn such things. 

Red Spine had scrambled up the 
sloping surface of a large boul- 
der. Now he sat well above the de- 
sert floor, his stalked eyes flicking 
back and forth restlessly, his 
spines glowing. 

Across the desert, from every 
direction, the canceroids were 
coming. Each carapace glittered 
and flashed with the pattern that 
made every individual differ- 
ent. As the yellow sun Cancer 
dropped behind the uptilted 
range, the colors brightened. 

Since it had landed  many 
starshines ago the great bulk of 
the carrier had lain inert, un- 
changing, unmoving. It had, in- 
deed, often opened holes in itself, 
through which the invader beings 
came out and went in. In the radi- 
ation of the sun they were always 
covered with the white cara- 



68 



IF 




paces, each showing the one large 
eye. In the starshine they were dif- 
ferent. The carapaces disap- 
peared  the beings were slender 
and pliant, their appendages thin. 
The one big eye was replaced by 
two small ones, without any stalks 
at all, and below these a mouth 
opening where all the sounds came 
out. Yet they were the same be- 
ings. They carried on the same ac- 
tivities, made the same sounds. It 
was possible to distinguish one 
from another by size and by the 
depth and the pitch of their noises. 
Red Spine had come to know sev- 
eral of them rather well. 

They destroyed the Eater with 
ease, Knobbed Claw signaled. 
Are we wise to assemble here? 



Why should they not destroy us as 
well? 

What would be their purpose? 
They do not require a home- 
world. With their carrier they can 
go wherever they choose, perhaps 
to the very stars themselves. No, 
Red Spine insisted, they mean no 
harm to us. They wish us well. 

They wish us well, Blue Dot 
echoed. They destroyed the Eat- 
er. We assemble here to thank 
them. 

They wish us well! The mes- 
sage pulsed from thought center to 
thought center, on out to the edges 
of the sea of great disks that spread 
over much distance and in all di- 
rections. around the alien craft. 
The sun was gone. In the starshine 



Now in paperback! 

Lester del Keys 

first new adult Science Fiction 
novel in ten years 

PSTALEMATE 

** Highly original' -Theodore Sturgeon, 

N.Y. Times Book Review 

Utter believability and constantly 
heightening fascination. 

Harlan Ellison, Los Angeles Times 

95* wherever Berkley paperbacks are sold 

BERKLEY PUBLISHING GORP. 

200 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016 




THE INVADERS 



69 






each carapace glowed ever bright- 
er as the signal was repeated. The 
desert was a shimmering, shift- 
ing pattern of multicolored 
lights. 

The carrier responded. Its vast 
dark bulk began to show open- 
ings, more and more openings, 
and into these spaces the aliens 
crowded, their small eyes peering 
out onto the wide-spread gather- 
ing of canceroids. The aliens 
waved their appendages, their 
mouths opened and closed and Red 
Spine knew that they were making 
the noises of speech, though the 
clear substance that covered each 
opening did not allow the sounds 
to be heard. 

But then a sound did come, a 
great sound that was speech, as 
though the carrier itself spoke, 
and canceroids yet miles away 
heard it plainly. Red Spine still 
had no clues as to the meanings of 
the sounds, but he recorded all 
that he detected. In quieter times, 
when meditation and thought 
were again possible, he promised 
himself that he would learn to un- 
derstand them. 

So he recorded the great sound, 
the last he was'to hear. 

Goodbye, crab people! We 
hope youre here to show grati- 
tude, but if instead weve de- 
stroyed your god, were sorry. It 
seemed sort of necessary at the 



time. Anyhow, whether you know 
it or not, youre better off. 

Then another voice came, one 
well known to Red Spine. 

So long. Red Spine old buddy! 
Ive met a lot worse citizens than 
you. We wish you well! 

The openings vanished. The car- 
rier lay, a long, black forbidding 
shadow, showing no life at all. 
Then slowly, gently, silently, it 
began to rise. It swept easily in a 
huge circle over the thousands of 
canceroids, its dark bulk blotting 
out the starshine. High and higher 
it spiraled, the greatest marvel 
the homeworld Cancerol would 
know for countless ages. 

Red Spine atop his boulder felt 
a surge of feeling and he knew it 
was regret. He reared himself 
high on his many appendages. He 
fixed his stalked eyes on the dis- 
tant spacecraft  and flashed the 
peace sign. Others around him fol- 
lowed the example. Ten thou- 
sand pale golden beams lanced up- 
ward against the stars. 

The ship swung around once 
more. From it a cone of light 
flashed downward, light of the 
same quality as the small beams of 
the canceroids. 

The beings had learned the peace 
sign. They were civilized, after 
all. 

Red Spine sat alone on his boul- 
der and thought 1  and wondered.  



70 



IF 




Where a world may perish, 
a word may not if somebody 
remembered to write it! 



THE 

MEANING 
OF THE 
WORD 



CHELSEA QUINN YARBRO 



I SAW something odd, fuzzed 
with the sand glimmering in the 
coral sunlight and I began to slog 
my way toward it. 

Jhirinki, get back here! Wol- 
ton ordered from the skiff. He was 
sounding angrier by the minute. 

Theres something out   I 
tried to tell him but Almrid cut me 
off. 

Let him alone, Wolton. Your 
jurisdiction goes no farther than 
the skiff. Then, with scarcely a 
change in tone, he said to me, 
You stay here until camp is set 
up. I want to know where every- 




Wolton gave him a sour smile 
and motioned me away. But it was 
important that they know about 
that irregularity. I tried again. I 
saw something out there. It 
doesnt look   

Wait until the camp is set up. 
We need to get some more defin- 
itive readings before we go ex- 
ploring. And Almrid added to 
Wolton  we cant get those with- 
out the prowler. 

Wolton jerked the hatch of the 
skiff open. All right. Heres the 
prowler. You know that, it cant 
get any better data from the sur- 
face than the monitors can. 

Look, Almrid   I began. 

Not now, Peter. Well talk 
later. When we have more ac- 
curate material to work from. 
This last was, of course, for Wol- 
ton. 

It was useless. I stepped back as 
Wolton reluctantly put the prowler 
in action, letting it scuttle out over 
the hazy sand, scanners clicking 
contentedly to itself. 

Sumiko Hyasu had barricaded 
herself behind her equipment, 
preparing to run soil tests. She 
and Langly, the biochemist, 
worked in silence, the remote 
sounds of their breathing mur- 
muring in my earphones. 

On the other side of the skiff I 
knew Parnini and Goetz were furl- 
ing the sails of the weather unit. I 



could hear them swearing oc- 
casionally. They were busy. Wol- 
ton and Almrid were still arguing. 
My eyes were dragged back again 
to that irregular spot in the sand 
that might be what I wanted. That 
might be digs. 

Im calling Captain Tamo- 
shoe, Wolton declared to any- 
one who would listen. Im going 
to give him a status report. 

That is your responsibility, 
murmured Almrid as he watched 
the prowler set zig-zagging in a 
widening spiral. His heavy head 
was even larger in the Class Eleven 
uniform. His hands hung like paws, 
wholly unlike what one expected 
in a virologist. It was hard to think 
of him doing the minute mani- 
pulations that were the mark of 
his work  it was like trying to 
imagine Caliban or Quasimodo 
making watches or microcir- 
cuitry. 

A yawning breeze wound a bit 
of dust on its finger and then sank 
back, too tired to hold it. That was 
the feel of the whole place  
drowsiness. The wind barely 
breathed. The plain was heavy with 
dreaming, the sky unmarred by 
clouds where the greater of two 
suns hung about fifteen degrees 
above the horizon, a platter of 
polished copper. Our presence in- 
truded on this somnambulistic 
landscape where even the rocks 



72 



IF 




were softened and sometimes 
crumbling and in placejof dirt there 
was sand that was not sand flicker- 
ing in the monochrome stillness. 

Yet 1 wondered and hoped. 
There had been indications of 
structures from the monitors on 
the Nordenskjold. I knew my digs 
were here to be found, if only I 
knew where to look. 

Jhirinkis been wandering 
around,' Wolton was reporting 
and the sound of my name brought 
me back to the camp. He added in 
response to the captains garbled 
question, It was Almrids idea to 
bring along an archeologist. Not 
mine. Ask him. 

In the slow heat of the opal- 
escent afternoon work was 
sluggish. There was nothing for 
me to do but stare at the one odd 
spot in the distance  and wish. 

Goetz swore in my earphone as 
his equipment toppled for the sec- 
ond time, victim to the treach- 
erous shifting of the sand. Need 
help? I asked him, not reluctant- 
lyr 

What I need is a foundation, 
came his answer, the words bitten 
out in frustration. 

According to the monitors, 
Almrid said icily, directing the in- 
sult at Wolton, theres all kinds 
of rock around here. Or, maybe 
not rock. Maybe it once was build- 
ings." 



Look, Almrid Wolton be- 
gan. 

Then, unexpectedly, Sumiko 
Hyasu cut in. Leave him alone, 
Franz, she said softly to Almrid. 
We have work to do. 

It looks like youve wasted your 
trip, Peter, Almrid said to me, a 
certain morose satisfaction in this 
statement. Why dont you ride 
up tonight and forget it? There 
are other planets. 

I wondered if my disappoint- 
ment showed so much. 

I think Ill stick around for a 
while, I said. 

4< DONT know, Sumiko, I 
was saying as we watched the 
second skiff settle onto the sand. 
I cant give up the thought that 
theres something here. 

Absently she made some an- 
swer. 

Dont you feel that? 

I suppose so. She was only 
half-listening. This world was too 
unknown, too compelling for us 
to pay much attention to each 
other. Everyone of us saw it 
through his/her eyes only, Is any 
of this real, Peter? she asked. Or 
is the planet hiding from us? 

I had felt that from the first. 
Something was hidden here right 
under our noses and we hadnt the 
sense to find it. But all I could do 
was shrug. I didnt know then what 



THE MEAN I NG OF THE WORD 



73 




she wanted to find, what it was she 
had been searching for with that 
terrible, fragile intensity that 
marked her more than her beauty. 

What do you want to find? she 
asked me. 

Oh, I dont know. It was a lie 
and, like a lot of lies, it felt ugly. 
But I couldnt admit to her that I 
had longed for the chance to find a 
lost civilization here, to be the 
first to decipher its language. Peo- 
ple could be known and under- 
stood by the way they used words, 
and to be the first to understand 
in that way had been an obsession 
with me since before I trained on 
the Probe Ship Magalhaes. 

Youre going to do some ex- 
ploring later? It wasnt really a 
question, it was a dismissal. 

Whenever Aljnrid and Wol- 
ton get tired of fighting and give a 
general release, then, yes. Ill go 
exploring. Neither of them was 
willing to stop feuding long 
enough to let the expedition get 
moving and I was becoming riled 
at the delay. But Commander 
Markham would be in the next 
skiff and knowing Josh, he would 
put an end to the sparring that had 
taken up too much time already. 

Good luck, she murmured 
and went back to her equipment. 
Then, as she started adjusting the 
sample breakdowns, her voice 
sounded again in my earphones. 



Why wait? Why not do what you 
want to do? 

B Y THE time the base camp 
had been set up and the full 
complement of expedition staff 
had been ferried down the surface 
shelters were waiting. I had spent 
the long afternoon struggling 
with ring supports, emplacing 
the doughnut-shaped foundations 
for the inflatable buildings, but 
now it was night. 

I walked away from the camp, 
watching the unfamiliar sky. 
There were more and brighter stars 
above me and some eleven dis- 
similar moons coursed overhead 
in a bewildering tangle. 

In a while I found the irregular 
stone, although I had not con- 
sciously been looking for it  I 
had been drawn to it as surely as 
fur draws static. I knew that it 
would tell me what I wanted to 
know, if only I could puzzle it out 
before Captain Tamoshoe or- 
dered us all back to the Nor- 
denskjold. Yet, as I stood over it, 
not knowing where to look or 
what I was looking for, I could 
still mock myself for being so ob- 
sessed with wanting to find a lan- 
guage and a culture that obvious- 
ly had failed in all this desolation. 
What could it teach us? 

So I paced the thing off non- 
chalantly. It was not too large. 



74 



IF 




this oblong section of rock, rath- 
er like one of the old headstones in 
the landmark cemeteries. 

I kneeled in the sand and rubbed 
at the side of the block  and 
touched what I thought at first was 
a flaw or chip in the surface. Cur- 
ious, I bent closer, gently blowing 
the clinging dirt from the slab with 
my sweat valve, brushing the stone 
clear as I worked. 

And then, there it was. Without 
any doubt, without any am- 
biguity, the glyphs appeared un- 
der my hands. I drew back to get a 
proper look at them. 

-1 cbocS^^ 

For several minutes I sat and 
looked at them. The stillness of 
the night was suddenly alien. 
Eight low relief marks on a 
rock  and I felt for the first time 
that all I am was justified. 

I rose, wiping more of the block 
free of the sand, but I could find 
nothing more. The inexorable 
movement of the sand might have 
worn other markings away, or 
perhaps the stone reached deeper 
into the ground than I had thought 
at first, with more glyphs farther 
down. Almrid and Wolton had 
said something about erosion. 
Perhaps this had been high above 
the sand, once. 

It seemed like a long way back 



to the camp just to get a shovel and 
some help. I stood, rubbing my 
hands together to free them of the 
dust that was clinging insidiously 
to them and to film of my surface 
suit. Was it worth it, going all the 
way back? I could do more here to- 
night even without tools. And if I 
went back, Almrid or Wolton 
would be sure to try to stop me 
from coming back. In the morn- 
ing I could bring some of the ex- 
pedition with me, but then this 
find would no longer be mine. I 
finally accepted the rationaliza- 
tion that left me alone with my 
particular dream for a little 
longer. 

Setting to work, I scooped arm- 
loads of the soil away from the 
block, hoping to discover more 
glyphs. I felt that I had found the 
key to a larger discovery. 

It was on the fifth armload that 
I fell through into the room. 

D UST spread out around me 
like a reverse halo against the 
shiny surface of the floor. I tasted 
grit  the suit must have ruptured 
somewhere. As I lay on the floor I 
took stock. No bones broken, but 
some dandy bruises. I gathered 
my knees beneath me and care- 
fully stood up. It was dark down 
here except for the shine from the 
moons through the hole. There was 
no other light. 



THE MEANING OF THE WORD 



75 




With uncertain fingers I 
grabbed for my litepak and found 
it undamaged. Thumbing it, I 
found that it could hardly reach 
beyond the sand on the floor. Af- 
ter a moment of thought I turned 
it off and began walking slowly in 
an outward spiral. 

On the third round I bumped in- 
to a thing, apparently of stone, 
about the size of a half-chair with a 
shoe-shaped projection. It felt 
smooth and solid. 

Curiouser and curiouser, I 
said aloud to the unechoing 
blackness. 

Slowly I wandered back to the 
sand haze on the floor, the site of 
my fall. I looked up at the rent in 
the roof. The realization rushed 
in on me then that I was truly cut 
off from the expedition. I had left 
my commkit at the camp and my 
litepaks trickle of a beam could 
not have been seen by anyone at 
that distance. The sand filtered 
down through the hole, whisper- 
ing. 

And the light was failing. Two 
of the moons had set since I had 
fallen into my find and I could not 
get out without light. 

Let s leave that alone for the mo- 
ment , Jhirinki, I told myself for 
comfort. 

Then, as I watched, the great 
heavy stone I had loosened by my 
fall gave a kind of sigh and, with 



deceptive languor, tumbled end 
over end to crash and shatter on 
the floor. If it had fallen straight 
down, that would have been the end 
of Peter Jhirinki. 

Badly shaken, I went back to 
the object I had walked into 
earlier. My hands shook when I 
reached out to steady myself, and 
I drew them back. 

Perhaps I should touch nothing 
here until I knew what had made 
that great stone fall. Were other 
stones still in the ceiling above me? 

Anxiously I pulled out my lite- 
pak again and played its feeble 
beam over the ceiling. But the fact 
that I saw no other blocks of stone 
was actually small comfort. This 
room was an important find and I 
was without means to see it  and 
now too isolated to get the help I 
needed. I also remembered there 
was a tear in my suit, which might 
or might not mean anything on 
this planet. 

Again I wandered back to the 
place beneath the hole, taking 
care not to get near the gently fall- 
ing sands. 

Peter! 

For a moment I didnt believe 
the sound in my suit phone. Then, 
as my name was called again, I 
realized that I had been missed 
and that a party was searching 
for me. 

Yeo! I yelled, full of relief. 



76 



IF 




The stream of dust into the hole 
increased. 

Peter Jhirinki   Now that the 
voices were closer I was able to 
pick out Markham's among the 
others  a large resonant sound 
that no commsystem could 
properly handle. 

Down here   More rivulets 
of the soft dust were pouring down 
now and I wondered how strong 
the roof was. Be careful  I 
dont know how long the roof here 
willhold. 

Thanks. Markhams voice. 
Well get you out of there. Dom- 
inguiz went back for the rig. Af- 
ter a moments silence Josh 
Markham asked, And did you 
find anything down there, Pete? 

It took me a little time to an- 
swer him. I hope so, I said final- 
ly. Then, as I looked around the 
dark, I didnt want to leave. Drop 
me a litepak, will you? 

Right. And in a moment 
Markhams litepak in its crash- 
case thudded to the floor. Dom- 
inguiz will be back any time, Pete. 
Make it short. 

B UT I knew that. I wrenched 
the litepak from its case and 
pressed the switch. The beam 
stabbed into the darkness, show- 
ing me the room for the first time. 

It was large, low-ceilinged and 
shiny save for the place where I had 



brought in the sand. Two of the 
walls were a patchwork of de- 
signs, intricate embossed pat- 
terns on tilelike bricks. The other 
two walls . 

The other two walls were cov- 
ered with glyphs. 

Get ready, Pete. Markham 
cut into my discovery like razor 
into flesh. I cant get this very 
steady. Youll have to guide it com- 
ing out. 

There was a clank of the rig as 
the saddle hit the floor, then the 
purposeful clicking of the pulleys 
set in motion. 

Quickly I straddled the saddle, 
grabbing the upper sling so that I 
could help control the lift. 

Were under way, Markham 
called as the rig hoisted me into 
the air. 

I turned the beam of the litepak 
on the walls as I rose, letting the 
light linger on the marks for as 
long as I could. 

I got my back scraped coming 
out of the hole, but I was too pre- 
occupied to notice it until Josh 
Markham said, Holy Mama, 

.ere did you get that? 

I looked at my arm, saw noth- 
ing and shrugged. 

Your back, man, your back. 

As soon as he said it, the pain hit 
like a hammer. Oh. That. For a 
moment I concentrated on the 
damage and decided that it 



THE MEANING OF THE WORD 



77 




wasnt that much. Coming out of 
the hole, I think. Is it bad? 

Relieved, Josh said, Its 
messy. Have Sanderson look at it 
back at the base. Hell want to 
check you for foreign bugs any- 
way. What the devil did you find 
down there? 

Words, I said quietly. A 
whole world of words. 

There are ruins down there? 
He asked it incredulously, his big 
body slewing about in the sand. 
A city? 

I dont know about the city, but 
there sure as hell are words. May- 
be a complete language. Im go- 
ing back down tomorrow and find 
out. 

Markham eyed me suspicious- 
ly. What if Wolton says other- 
wise? What if I sfcy otherwise? 

It wouldnt matter. As I said 
it, I knew it could make no dif- 
ference what they said. Nothing 
anyone could say or do would 
keep me out of that hole now that I 
had seen the wall. 

All right, Pete. But dont push 
your luck. This place is still terra 
incognita as far as were con- 
cerned. 

I nodded. Thats just it. It 
wont be unknown if I can get a 
chance at that wall. Theres the 
whole puzzle, right down there. 
Complete with solution. 

Hdy, wont machines do as 



well? Dominguiz put in, having 
listened to us as he stowed the gear 
in the crawler. We got machines 
for that. 

No. I spoke harshly, but 
there was no way for me to say it 
kindly. No machine wrote that, 
no machine is going to read it. 
That is what Im trained for. Thats 
why Im part of the crew. And its 
what Ive wanted to do all my life. 

Sure. Sure. I dont care 
whether you get yourself ruined. I 
just want to know. Academics! 
He sat down in the driving cock- 
pit. You two can ride in the back 
if you want. He didnt wait for an 
answer, preferring his machines to 
our company. 

Josh Markham and I scrambled 
aboard as the crawler began its 
lurching way off through the sand. 
Only it wasnt sand. 

Josh, I said uncertainly as 
we clung to the rear platform of 
the crawler. I think I know what 
this stuff is. 

The dirt? Damned persistent, 
isnt it? 

It isnt dirt, I told him slowly, 
avoiding his eyes. I think its 
ash. 

THIS is where you dis- 
appeared to, Franz Almrid 
said, wiping his hands in a futile 
gesture to rid them of the ash. 

Yes. I was beaming with 



78 



IF 




pride. In the morning light the 
hole was even better than I had 
thought. 

What is it?" Almrids voice 
held open sarcasm as he looked at 
the figures on the wall. Looks 
like spermatozoa in formation 
with math symbols." 

It does at that," I admitted, 
determined not to fight with Aim- 
rid. The very fact that there had 
been something worth discover- 
ing on this planet had made him 
furious. 

You really think youre going 
to get sense out of that?" He gave 
a derisive laugh. Youre kidding 
yourself, Jhirinki." 

I was spared the problem of an- 
swering him by Josh Markham, 
who* was lowered into the hole on 
the new cable rig. 

Looks good, Pete," Josh said, 
craning his corded neck, trying to 
see it all without turning around. 
Whats next?" 

Well, that wall," I told him, 
pointing to the farthest one, is 
probably not worth much. Its too 
scarred and faded. But this  " I 
looked at the longer wall with its 
bright surface and clear mark- 
ings  is a treasure." 

It was as if I had finally lured a 
much-sought mistress into my 
bed. That wall, with its thousands 
of glyphs in neatly horizontal 
lines was more than I had ever 



hoped to have for myself. 

Youre a damned romantic, 
thats what you are, Josh said 
with a chuckle. Well, while youre 
busy down here, well just go along 
and dig up a few square miles of 
ash, in case there might be a city 
down there." 

Id told him that there might be, 
late late last night after I had re- 
ported the find. In the morning I 
wondered if Id been right, but \tt 
it go. The chance was worth a look. 

If youre sure this is a building, 
where is the door? Or did they all 
tumble in the way you did? 
Almrids icy tone stopped both 
Josh and me. 

I hated to admit it, but Almrid 
had a point. If this had been a 
building there had to be a way in 
and out of it. And no matter what 
size or shape the inhabitants a 
door is a door is a door. 

Maybe in the floor?" Josh sug- 
gested. This is pretty high up, 
judging from the few readings 
we can get around here. Maybe 
this was an attic or a sun room." 
He looked at me hopefully, his big 
hands rubbing at the ash. 

Its possible. Looking 
around the room I knew there was 
an answer. I just had to be left 
alone to find it with my instincts 
and my pores. 

Theres nothing for us peas- 
ants to do but dig," Almrid said 



TtoE MEANING OF THE WORD 



79 




acidly. All right. Professor. 
Well do it your way. He went to 
the sling and was hauled out of the 
hole. 

Dont let him bother you, 
Pete, Josh said with all the reas- 
surance he could muster. He 
doesnt like the place and cant fig- 
ure out why. 

I know. 

A short silence fell. 

Well, Ill leave you to your 
work. Call if you need help. 

I will, I promised him as he 
rose through the hole. 

W HEN he was gone I circled 
the room again, looking at 
the wall with the glyphs. There was 
a key somewhere. There had to be. 
I could find it if I thought about it. 
Again I came U) the bench-like af- 
fair. Again I studied the surface of 
the shoe end. It was smooth and 
faintly luminous. For a moment 
it seemed to be the reflection of 
one of the suns  and then I rea- 
lized that neither was shining 
down directly. This made me won- 
der. 

I sat on the half-chair (which was 
a bit too low and too small for 
comfort). This might be the clue I 
wanted. In my annoyance I 
tapped the cool, faintly glowing 
sheet of  was it stone? The echo 
sounded unused. I went on tap- 
ping absent-mindedly as I tried 



to take stock of the wall and the 
*room. 

Blink . 

I was so startled that I raised my 
hand. The light, if there had been a 
light, stopped. 

But now I had a hope. Gently I 
tapped the surface again. Then 
firmly. 

BLINK 

Then I put my hands full and 
solidly onto the surface of the 
table, pressing it, willing the light 
to continue. Come on, light, I 
pleaded with it. Blink. 

Almost ridiculously, it did. 
First there was a flicker, then a 
wavering opacity and finally a 
bright glow. 

What the bloody hell is this? I 
asked of the air joyously. Since 
there was no one but me to an- 
swer, I shook my head in ignor- 
ance. 

The light in the table was in- 
creasing, growing brilliant. Sym- 
bols formed on it: 

r1o^: + 

I think   I said to the ma- 
chine. Then l realized that 1 would 
have to stop thinking and be will- 
ing to learn. Machine, you and I 
have a little mutual understand- 
ing to do. 

The symbols faded but the light 
stayed on, full and strong. I hesi- 



80 



IF 




tated  then, taking my stylus, 1 
made a small circle on the table 
and put nine dots leading out from 
it, added little points for the 
moons. When this was done, I 
drew a box around Terra and 
waited. 

The machine buzzed. 

On a guess I wiped the marks 
away. 

In a moment the machine 
showed two circles and a series of 
dots, putting a box around the 
fourth one. This was the fourth 
planet, but the machine showed 
only three moons. This bothered 
me, but there was no way to ques- 
tion the machine about it. I would 
have to wait. 

But we were on the right track. 

I duplicated the Sol system dia* 
gram and boxed Terra and labeled 
it. 

The machine made the planets 
again, with the puzzling moons. 

All right. Now that we're in- 
troduced, let's get down to lan- 
guages." 

The machine began to hum, 
making periodic squeaks. I 
couldn't have it malfunction now. 
I fumbled over the sides, looking 
for knobs or dials that might help. 
The hum and the squeaks merged 
into a rising wail. 

Wait a bit," I told it. 

I moved my hands again, rub- 
bing the sides firmly until a single 



dot appeared on the screen in front 
of me and I heard, very clearly the 
single word: Ge/. 

My hands began to shake. I 
sensed that this was a machine in- 
tended to teach, to inform. The 
concept was not unfamiliar to 
human archeologists  men of 
many eras had left time capsules 
or other record of their passing 
for future centuries to Find. Who- 
ever had left this artifact had 
known what he was about. The im- 
plications took a little time to 
sink in. 

The machine formed another 
dot directly above the first and 
called it: Shy/* 

It was giving me the elements 
of language. Those two symbols 
were part of the name of the plan- 
et. 

A vertical line connected the 
two dots and the dots faded out. 
Sti, said the machine in its 
parody of a voice. 

I took out my scanner and 
trained it on the table top. The 
scanner would give the Nor - 
denskjold a record of all this in 
case something went wrong down 
here. 

TT hen 1 set to work, the ma- 
chine reciting its language to 
me, showing it to me, bringing 
it to life. 

Pete! Pete! Answer me!" The 



THE MEANING OF THE WORD 



81 




commkit beside me sounded put 
out. The voice was Sumikos, high 
and overcontrolled. I wondered 
if she had been calling for long. I 
had been absorbed. 

I stood up stiffly from the 
bench, muscles protesting, and 
reached for the kit. 

Pete   it went in my ear. 

Yeo. Im here. What is it? 
This is Sumiko. Ive finished 
the tests on the silt from your digs. 
Youre right. It is ash. 

I know. Look, I said, rushing 
on, I may be way off, but I think 
you might find some evidence of 
volcanic or  I dont know, earth- 
quakes, maybe, a long time ago. 
Thered be a lot of them, occurring 
all at once or with little warning. 
The diagram Ive found down here 
shows only thpee moons. Either 
weve got the wrong planet or 
things have changed upstairs   
What diagram? she inter- 
rupted. 

Theres a device down here 
that teaches the language, I ad- 
mitted reluctantly. It seems to 
be programed to communicate 
with strangers  I mean beings 
possibly alien to whoever or 
whatever made it, which suggests 
that the culture of which it was a 
part anticipated being wiped out. 
The device and I have just begun 
to come together on basics  I 
should get the rest in a few days. 



Youll let me know? This was 
said too quickly. 

Sure, Sumiko. Right then, I 
wanted her to find what she was 
seeking, too. There had to be 
something here to compensate 
for the terrible hunger at the back 
of her eyes also. 

Youll need tools, she said de- 
cisively. 

Maybe some digging tools. 
Brushes for the walls. Levers and a 
couple of files. Theres a pack in 
my shelter. 

Is that all? Ill bring them 
along. 

Thank you. There was a 
jealousy in me as I spoke. I was 
not yet ready to share my hole, my 
wall. Not with anyone. Not even 
Sumiko, the one person who 
might understand what I felt. 

Ill be there as soon as the cap- 
tain is ready to come over. 

In some surprise I asked her, 
Is he down on the surface? I 
didnt think he was planning to 
come. 

He and Wolton have been go- 
ing over the whole camp for about 
the last hour. .Hes had Almrid 
and Dominguiz in. I gave them my 
report earlier. 

A prickle ran along my spine, a 
feeling that gravity had shifted, 
immeasurably, under my feet. 
The captain had gone to the soil 
chemist and a biophysicist before 



82 



IF 




the archeologist on a planet with 
digs. Something wasnt right. 

Pete? 

What? 

Ill see you later? 

Yeah, I said. Its going to be 
interesting. And with that I 
signed off. 

Standing there in my hole, with 
the language of Shy-gei-ath wait- 
ing for me, I frowned, wondering 
what had gone wrong. No one had 
come in with a negative report. 
There had been no warnings about 
the virology level or the func- 
tional radiation ratings that 
usually got the captain on the 
groung long enough to get every- 
one back to the ship. 

I remembered my scraped back 
from the evening before, but that 
couldnt figure in anything. The in- 
jury itched unpleasantly under 
the thin surface suit and there had 
been some trouble getting it to 
scab over. But that was hardly 
enough to worry about. What was 
Captain Tamoshoe doing down 
here, anyway? Why had he come? 

The machine was reciting co- 
rel-sti-gei" sa-che-sti-gei" p, 
co-sa-che-sti-gei P , when I final- 
ly heard the noise above me. I 
tapped the machine on what I'd 
come to think of as the hold but- 
ton and waited for visitors. 

They took their time. Once 1 
heard Franz Almrid swear, use 



cold words with venom I had nev- 
er heard from him before. 

A T LAST the sling came down, 
bearing Captain Nemeu 
Tamoshoe, black on black. 

Jhirinki, he said, turning his 
trademark grin on me, a display 
of large white teeth in a face only 
slightly lighter than his black cap- 
tains uniform. And in that face, 
which dictated eyes of obsidian, 
Captain Tamoshoes smouldered 
the impossible blue of Aegean 
waters. 

Whats wrong, Captain? 

But he didnt answer me, not 
right away. He got off the sling and 
began to walk around the hole. 
Have you been able to decipher 
this? he asked me, pointing at my 
wall. 

I knew that there was some- 
thing very wrong then. That sec- 
tion youre pointing to reads from 
right to left: 'Thir de-lom-sti-gei 
jhae emh bis lom-de-sti-gei / Sec- 
ond line:  Thu shy-ens emh thu 
lom-qua-fer-de-sti-gei sir-ath- 
gei/" 

Which means? 

That is what the walls says, sir. 
In fact, right now I can read out 
loud every word up there and 
make the symbol for it if I hear it 
spoken. But I dont yet know what 
it means, because this machine 
does not have a way to tell me un- 



THE MEANING OF THE WORD 



83 




til it has explained to me all the 
elements of its language. But the 
communications center on the 
ship will have records of this so I 
can work from them, if neces- 
sary. 

Captain Tamoshoe looked at 
me evenly for about a minute, an 
eternity. I am sorry, Jhirinki. 
The commcenter didnt pick up. the 
relay. Almrid and Wolton were too 
busy wrangling to center the chan- 
nel. 

I dont understand   and as I 
said it I did understand. 

Radiology reported a variance 
last night. This place was hot. That 
little machine of yours has been 
running along on plutonium and 
the room was sealed. You fell into 
a vat of radon gas   He stopped. 
Then: Theres isnt much danger 
on the surface of course, but we 
dont know how many of these 
things there are. I am sorry, 
Jhirinki. 

Wait   Josh Markham ap- 
peared in the hole, hanging onto 
the sling too tightly, his large face 
drawn and his eyes heavy. Cap- 
tain? 

I have told him what I could. 
You can explain it more thorough- 
ly if necessary. Are we ready to 
ferry up? 

Almost. 

Again Captain Tamoshoe: It 
is a pity. This is surely the find of a 



lifetime. He turned back to me, 
blue eyes hooded. Well, perhaps 
you will be able to reconstruct 
much of this from memory, do you 
think? There isnt much time and it 
would be a shame to lose all of it. 
How do you mean" lose it? I 
was frightened then, not of the 
radiation that had slid in through 
my respirator into my bones, but 
of leaving Shy-gei-ath. I had come 
so far. I did not want to leave. 

Looks like this one was more 
trouble than it was worth, Pete, 
Markham said, trying to keep his 
tone light and failing. 

No. 

Pete 

No, I told them again, step- 
ping back to the teaching ma- 
chine. Ive almost got it all. Im 
so close to the meaning of it. It 
wont take too much longer. Ill be 
out of here in no time. 

J OSH shook is head. Cant do 
it, Pete. Youve been exposed. 
We should have brought you out 
before now, but I knew this was 
damned important to you. 

Wait   I said, licking my 
lips. What is the treatment for 
radon? Cant I take decontamina- 
tion and then come back. Its gone 
now  and Id be safe. 

I am sorry, but we'll have to 
put the place in quarantine until 
we know how much potential 



84 



IF 




danger remains, Captain Tamo- 
shoe said apologetically. You un- 
derstand the necessity, dont you? 
When all investigations have 
been made we can come back. 
But what about that? I 
pointed to the wall, already haz- 
ing from the dust filtering down. 
How much longer will that be 
here once the ash gets in? The oth- 
er walj, is almost useless. This one 
will be ruined. 

There may be others. 

And maybe there arent. I 
knew I was starting to . sweat. 
And the machine will be ruined. 
Captain Tamoshoe shook his 
head. I can recommend speed 
and claim emergency status on the 
artifacts. The Navy is aware of 
the value of this sort of find. We 
might be able to have full Class 
Nine suits authorized. 

Youve got to leave, Pete. 
Markham had taken a step toward 
me. I stepped back. 

Commander Markham, the 
captain said quietly. 

Take a look at your hands, 
Pete. Josh shot an angry look at 
Captain Tamoshoe as he spoke. 

What about my hands? But as 
I looked down and saw what 
looked like varicose veins in my 
palms I closed the marks inside 
my fists. 

The skiff is waiting, Pete. 

Let it wait. And as Josh 



started toward me I raised the 
commkit ovei; my head. Dont 
try it. Josh 1 will use this. 

It wasnt much of a weapon, but 
it made Josh stop. You stupid 
kid, he said dispassionately. 
Youre going to die. 

Am 1? I asked Captain 
Tamoshoe. 

Almost certainly, he an- 
swered me. 

Without moving from the place 
I stood I said. Get out of here. 
Josh. I want to talk to the cap- 
tain. 

Josh looked at me with an ex- 
pression I had once seen in my fa- 
thers eyes. Then, with a nod to the 
captain, he let himself be hoisted 
out of the hole. 

He wants you to live, Jhirinki. 
And you were not assigned to my 
ship to die. 

In the stillness that followed his 
words I realized that he and I were 
the only people left here, that the 
others were back at the ferry, wait- 
ing to leave Shy-gei-ath. 1 felt an 
enormous loneliness fall over me, 
dark and heavy. 

Why not come back? 

I shook my head. No. This is 
what I'm all about. 

Ive spent my life learning to do 
what has to be done here. To add to 
what men may someday have to 
know. I cant leave when Im this 
close. 



THE MEANING OF THE WORD 



85 




Have you a choice? 

For just a moment I knew 
panic. Then: Will I last all that 
much longer if I leave? 

No. Not that much longer. 
Then Ill stay. 

But what will you do, Jhirinki? 
The strange part was that I knew 
the answer. As long as I can. Ill 
describe the forms to you, the way 
the machine did for me. You can 
leave me a skiff relay, cant you? 
Not waiting for an answer I hur- 
ried on. Ill try to translate what 
Ive found and you can record it for 
the Margien Language In- 
stitute. 

Captain Tamoshoe considered 
this. Ive always thought, he re- 
marked absently, that a mans 
death should be as much in his 
hands as his life. Youll get the re- 
lay. 

And food? 

He didnt answer me, so I knew. 
Thank you. Captain. 

Goodbye, Peter Jhirinki, he 
said as he left. 

44T OM-DE-STI-GEI ath dev 
-L* lim-gei, I dictated from 
the wall to the commkit. I listened 
for the relay sound that would tell 
me they had recorded the line on 
board the Nordenskjold . 

A half-dozen lines were left. 
Lines that wavered in front of me, 
milky with haze. 



Pete! 

But that wasnt my machine. It 
was someone I used to know. Why 
would Josh call me? What did he 
want? 

Pete, for Gods sake! 

What? 

That must have been what he 
wanted to hear. But I couldnt hold 
my commkit steady. My hands 
had gone funny. Purple. TJje ten- 
dons were soft, spongy. 

 . translations? 

That mattered to me. That was 
important. More important than 
my strange hands. I had to tell 
them. 

A few words   

What words? 

Shy-gei-ath. Like Terra and 
Terrans. 

The twin suns were hot above 
me, but it was dark. I burned and 
burned and it was dark. If I looked 
at the floor I could see my face. But 
I didnt do that. 

The wall, Pete. The wall. 

From here on the floor I could 
watch my wall as I told theYn about 
it. I knew what it meant at last. 

Shy, infinitive verb. To be. Ac- 
tive sense. Gei, infinitive verb. To 
be. Passive sense. Shy-sti-gei, to 
be alive. Sti-gei to exist. Shy-sti to 
conceive. They build from there. 
Was that sound me? 

But the wall, Pete. 

It was an effort, >but I began to 



86 



IF 




read. But breathing hurt and I got 
slower and slower. In the time of 
the Fourth Moon, I sought out a 
high place and made it safe against 
the end of Shy-gei-ath . " 

Go on. 

Against the end it hap- 
pened I found this place and re- 
quired a stronghold be built. The 
time was short for we could see in 
the night in the Fourth Moon. Wa- 
ters would soon rise, the moun- 
tains change and Rel-ath-gei would 
consume all. That would quiet 
them, the noisy ones above me. I 
looked at the wall through darken- 
ing eyes, turning on the floor to 
read the end of the story. 

Peter! Answer me! 

I kicked the commkit, laughing. 

What about the place name. 




August 24-26 , 1973 . DEEP 

SOUTH CON. At Mariott Ho- 
tel, New Orleans. Guest-of-Hon- 
or: Joseph Green. Membership: 

$3.00. For information: John 

Guidry, 5 Finch Street, New Or- 
leans, Louisiana 70124. 

 

August 31-September 3, 1973 

TORCON 2 31st World Sci- 



What does that mean? Weve got 
most of what we need to crack it, 
Peter. What does the name 
mean? 

Reluctantly I pulled myself 
across the floor, feeling like a slug, 
not a man. Just a bit more and- 
theyd leave me alone with my wall. 
Id earned that. 

The word? I asked the comm- 
kit. 

Shy-gei-ath/* the tinny voice 
prompted. 

" Shy-gei-ath . This place. Here. 
But that wasnt quite right, I 
thought as I watched the ash sift- 
ing through the hole. She-gei-ath. 
To be. to.  

Go on, tell us. What does it 
mean? 

So I told them. To be home.  



ence Fiction Convention: At Roy- 
al York Hotel, Toronto, Canada. 
Guest-of-Honor: Robert Bloch. 

Fan Guest-of-Honor: William 

Rotsler. Toastmaster at Hugo 
Awards Banquet: Lester del Rey. 
Membership: $7.00 attending and 
$4.00 supporting (until 8/1), 
$U).00 at the door. For informa- 
tion: Torcon 2, Box 4, Station K. 
Toronto 12, Ontario, Canada. 

 

October 5-7 , 1973 . BOUCHER- 
CON. At Sheraton Boston Hotel, 
Boston, Massachusetts. For infor- 
mation: Bouchercon, Box 113, 

Melrose, Massachusetts 02176. 

